Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Recommendations and Reports December 19, 2003 / Vol. 52 / No. RR-17 Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings — 2003 INSIDE: Continuing Education Examination dddddeeeeepppppaaaaarrrrrtttttmmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt ooooofffff hhhhheeeeeaaaaalllllttttthhhhh aaaaannnnnddddd hhhhhuuuuummmmmaaaaannnnn ssssseeeeerrrrrvvvvviiiiiccccceeeeesssss CCCCCeeeeennnnnttttteeeeerrrrrsssss fffffooooorrrrr DDDDDiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee CCCCCooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll aaaaannnnnddddd PPPPPrrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn MMWR CONTENTS The MMWR series of publications is published by the Introduction......................................................................... 1 Epidemiology Program Office, Centers for Disease Background......................................................................... 2 Control and Prevention (CDC), U.S. Department of Previous Recommendations .............................................. 3 Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333. Selected Definitions.......................................................... 4 Review of Science Related to Dental Infection Control......... 6 SUGGESTED CITATION Personnel Health Elements of an Infection-Control Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines Program.......................................................................... 6 for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings Preventing Transmission — 2003. MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-17):[inclusive page of Bloodborne Pathogens................................................ 10 numbers]. Hand Hygiene ................................................................ 14 Personal Protective Equipment........................................ 16 Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity................. 19 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Sterilization and Disinfection of Patient-Care Items......... 20 Julie L. Gerberding, M.D., M.P.H. Environmental Infection Control ..................................... 25 Director Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality......... 28 Special Considerations...................................................... 30 Dixie E. Snider, Jr., M.D., M.P.H. Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached (Acting) Deputy Director for Public Health Science to Air and Waterlines .................................................... 30 Susan Y. Chu, Ph.D., M.S.P.H. Saliva Ejectors ................................................................ 31 (Acting) Associate Director for Science Dental Radiology............................................................ 31 Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications ................. 31 Epidemiology Program Office Single-Use or Disposable Devices................................... 32 Stephen B. Thacker, M.D., M.Sc. Preprocedural Mouth Rinses ........................................... 32 Director Oral Surgical Procedures................................................ 32 Handling of Biopsy Specimens........................................ 33 Office of Scientific and Health Communications Handling of Extracted Teeth............................................ 33 John W. Ward, M.D. Dental Laboratory........................................................... 33 Director Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke.............. 34 Editor, MMWR Series M. tuberculosis.................................................................35 Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Other Prion Diseases...... 36 Suzanne M. Hewitt, M.P.A. Program Evaluation ........................................................ 37 Managing Editor, MMWR Series Infection-Control Research Considerations..................... 38 Recommendations............................................................. 39 C. Kay Smith-Akin, M.Ed. Infection-Control Internet Resources ................................. 48 Lead Technical Writer/Editor Acknowledgement............................................................. 48 C. Kay Smith-Akin, M.Ed. References......................................................................... 48 Douglas W. Weatherwax Appendix A ....................................................................... 62 Project Editors Appendix B........................................................................ 65 Appendix C ....................................................................... 66 Beverly J. Holland Continuing Education Activity* .......................................CE-1 Lead Visual Information Specialist Malbea A. LaPete Visual Information Specialist *For Continuing Dental Education (CDE), see http://www.ada.org. Kim L. Bright, M.B.A. To request additional copies of this report, contact CDC's Division Quang M. Doan, M.B.A. of Oral Health by e-mail: oralhealth@cdc.gov; telephone: 770-488- Erica R. Shaver 6054; or fax: 770-488-6080. Information Technology Specialists Disclosure of Relationship Our subject matter experts wish to disclose they have no financial interests or other relationships with the manufacture of commercial products, providers of commercial services, or commercial supporters. This report does not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of commercial products or products for investigational use. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 1 Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings — 2003 Prepared by William G. Kohn, D.D.S.1 Amy S. Collins, M.P.H.1 Jennifer L. Cleveland, D.D.S.1 Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S.2 Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P.3 Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H.1 1Division of Oral Health National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC 2United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service Great Lakes, Illinois 3The Forsyth Institute Boston, Massachusetts Summary This report consolidates previous recommendations and adds new ones for infection control in dental settings. Recommendations are provided regarding 1) educating and protecting dental health-care personnel; 2) preventing transmission of bloodborne patho- gens; 3) hand hygiene; 4) personal protective equipment; 5) contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity; 6) sterilization and disinfection of patient-care items; 7) environmental infection control; 8) dental unit waterlines, biofilm, and water quality; and 9) special considerations (e.g., dental handpieces and other devices, radiology, parenteral medications, oral surgical procedures, and dental laboratories). These recommendations were developed in collaboration with and after review by authorities on infection control from CDC and other public agencies, academia, and private and professional organizations. Introduction • hand-hygiene products and surgical hand antisepsis; (cid:127) contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity; This report consolidates recommendations for preventing (cid:127) sterilization of unwrapped instruments; and controlling infectious diseases and managing personnel (cid:127) dental water-quality concerns (e.g., dental unit waterline health and safety concerns related to infection control in den- biofilms; delivery of water of acceptable biological quality tal settings. This report 1) updates and revises previous CDC for patient care; usefulness of flushing waterlines; use of recommendations regarding infection control in dental set- sterile irrigating solutions for oral surgical procedures; tings (1,2); 2) incorporates relevant infection-control measures handling of community boil-water advisories); from other CDC guidelines; and 3) discusses concerns not (cid:127) dental radiology; addressed in previous recommendations for dentistry. These (cid:127) aseptic technique for parenteral medications; updates and additional topics include the following: (cid:127) preprocedural mouth rinsing for patients; (cid:127) application of standard precautions rather than universal (cid:127) oral surgical procedures; precautions; (cid:127) laser/electrosurgery plumes; (cid:127) work restrictions for health-care personnel (HCP) infected (cid:127) tuberculosis (TB); with or occupationally exposed to infectious diseases; (cid:127) Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and other prion-related (cid:127) management of occupational exposures to bloodborne diseases; pathogens, including postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) for (cid:127) infection-control program evaluation; and work exposures to hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C (cid:127) research considerations. virus (HCV); and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); These guidelines were developed by CDC staff members in (cid:127) selection and use of devices with features designed to pre- collaboration with other authorities on infection control. Draft vent sharps injury; documents were reviewed by other federal agencies and profes- sional organizations from the fields of dental health care, public The material in this report originated in the National Center for Chronic health, and hospital epidemiology and infection control. A Fed- Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, James S. Marks, M.D., eral Register notice elicited public comments that were consid- M.P.H., Director; and the Division of Oral Health, William R. Maas, ered in the decision-making process. Existing guidelines and D.D.S., M.P.H., Director. published research pertinent to dental infection-control prin- 2 MMWR December 19, 2003 ciples and practices were reviewed. Wherever possible, recom- droplets (e.g., spatter) containing microorganisms generated mendations are based on data from well-designed scientific stud- from an infected person and propelled a short distance (e.g., ies. However, only a limited number of studies have characterized by coughing, sneezing, or talking); and 4) inhalation of air- risk factors and the effectiveness of prevention measures for borne microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air infections associated with dental health-care practices. for long periods (5). Some infection-control practices routinely used by health- Infection through any of these routes requires that all of the care practitioners cannot be rigorously examined for ethical or following conditions be present: logistical reasons. In the absence of scientific evidence for such (cid:127) a pathogenic organism of sufficient virulence and in practices, certain recommendations are based on strong theo- adequate numbers to cause disease; retical rationale, suggestive evidence, or opinions of respected (cid:127) a reservoir or source that allows the pathogen to survive authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or and multiply (e.g., blood); committee reports. In addition, some recommendations are (cid:127) a mode of transmission from the source to the host; derived from federal regulations. No recommendations are (cid:127) a portal of entry through which the pathogen can enter offered for practices for which insufficient scientific evidence the host; and or lack of consensus supporting their effectiveness exists. (cid:127) a susceptible host (i.e., one who is not immune). Occurrence of these events provides the chain of infection (6). Effective infection-control strategies prevent disease transmis- Background sion by interrupting one or more links in the chain. In the United States, an estimated 9 million persons work in Previous CDC recommendations regarding infection con- health-care professions, including approximately 168,000 den- trol for dentistry focused primarily on the risk of transmission tists, 112,000 registered dental hygienists, 218,000 dental of bloodborne pathogens among DHCP and patients and use assistants (3), and 53,000 dental laboratory technicians (4). of universal precautions to reduce that risk (1,2,7,8). Univer- In this report, dental health-care personnel (DHCP) refers to sal precautions were based on the concept that all blood and all paid and unpaid personnel in the dental health-care setting body fluids that might be contaminated with blood should be who might be occupationally exposed to infectious materials, treated as infectious because patients with bloodborne infec- including body substances and contaminated supplies, equip- tions can be asymptomatic or unaware they are infected (9,10). ment, environmental surfaces, water, or air. DHCP include Preventive practices used to reduce blood exposures, particu- dentists, dental hygienists, dental assistants, dental laboratory larly percutaneous exposures, include 1) careful handling of technicians (in-office and commercial), students and trainees, sharp instruments, 2) use of rubber dams to minimize blood contractual personnel, and other persons not directly involved spattering; 3) handwashing; and 4) use of protective barriers in patient care but potentially exposed to infectious agents (e.g., (e.g., gloves, masks, protective eyewear, and gowns). administrative, clerical, housekeeping, maintenance, or vol- The relevance of universal precautions to other aspects of unteer personnel). Recommendations in this report are disease transmission was recognized, and in 1996, CDC designed to prevent or reduce potential for disease transmis- expanded the concept and changed the term to standard pre- sion from patient to DHCP, from DHCP to patient, and from cautions. Standard precautions integrate and expand the ele- patient to patient. Although these guidelines focus mainly on ments of universal precautions into a standard of care designed outpatient, ambulatory dental health-care settings, the recom- to protect HCP and patients from pathogens that can be spread mended infection-control practices are applicable to all set- by blood or any other body fluid, excretion, or secretion (11). tings in which dental treatment is provided. Standard precautions apply to contact with 1) blood; 2) all Dental patients and DHCP can be exposed to pathogenic body fluids, secretions, and excretions (except sweat), regard- microorganisms including cytomegalovirus (CMV), HBV, less of whether they contain blood; 3) nonintact skin; and 4) HCV, herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, HIV, Mycobacte- mucous membranes. Saliva has always been considered a rium tuberculosis, staphylococci, streptococci, and other viruses potentially infectious material in dental infection control; thus, and bacteria that colonize or infect the oral cavity and respira- no operational difference exists in clinical dental practice tory tract. These organisms can be transmitted in dental set- between universal precautions and standard precautions. tings through 1) direct contact with blood, oral fluids, or other In addition to standard precautions, other measures (e.g., patient materials; 2) indirect contact with contaminated expanded or transmission-based precautions) might be neces- objects (e.g., instruments, equipment, or environmental sur- sary to prevent potential spread of certain diseases (e.g., TB, faces); 3) contact of conjunctival, nasal, or oral mucosa with influenza, and varicella) that are transmitted through airborne, Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 3 droplet, or contact transmission (e.g., sneezing, coughing, and commitment and accountability of all DHCP. This report is contact with skin) (11). When acutely ill with these diseases, designed to provide guidance to DHCP for preventing disease patients do not usually seek routine dental outpatient care. transmission in dental health-care settings, for promoting a safe Nonetheless, a general understanding of precautions for dis- working environment, and for assisting dental practices in eases transmitted by all routes is critical because 1) some DHCP developing and implementing infection-control programs. These are hospital-based or work part-time in hospital settings; programs should be followed in addition to practices and pro- 2) patients infected with these diseases might seek urgent treat- cedures for worker protection required by the Occupational ment at outpatient dental offices; and 3) DHCP might Safety and Health Administration’s (OSHA) standards for become infected with these diseases. Necessary transmission- occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens (13), based precautions might include patient placement (e.g., iso- including instituting controls to protect employees from lation), adequate room ventilation, respiratory protection (e.g., exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials N-95 masks) for DHCP, or postponement of nonemergency (OPIM), and requiring implementation of a written exposure- dental procedures. control plan, annual employee training, HBV vaccinations, and DHCP should be familiar also with the hierarchy of con- postexposure follow-up (13). Interpretations and enforcement trols that categorizes and prioritizes prevention strategies (12). procedures are available to help DHCP apply this OSHA stan- For bloodborne pathogens, engineering controls that elimi- dard in practice (14). Also, manufacturer’s Material Safety Data nate or isolate the hazard (e.g., puncture-resistant sharps con- Sheets (MSDS) should be consulted regarding correct proce- tainers or needle-retraction devices) are the primary strategies dures for handling or working with hazardous chemicals (15). for protecting DHCP and patients. Where engineering con- trols are not available or appropriate, work-practice controls Previous Recommendations that result in safer behaviors (e.g., one-hand needle recapping This report includes relevant infection-control measures from or not using fingers for cheek retraction while using sharp the following previously published CDC guidelines and rec- instruments or suturing), and use of personal protective equip- ommendations: ment (PPE) (e.g., protective eyewear, gloves, and mask) can (cid:127) CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in prevent exposure (13). In addition, administrative controls health-care facilities: recommendations of CDC and the (e.g., policies, procedures, and enforcement measures targeted Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Commit- at reducing the risk of exposure to infectious persons) are a tee (HICPAC). MMWR (in press). priority for certain pathogens (e.g., M. tuberculosis), particu- (cid:127) CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in larly those spread by airborne or droplet routes. health-care facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Dental practices should develop a written infection-control Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Commit- program to prevent or reduce the risk of disease transmission. tee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-10). Such a program should include establishment and implemen- (cid:127) CDC. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular tation of policies, procedures, and practices (in conjunction catheter-related infections. MMWR 2002;51(No. RR-10). with selection and use of technologies and products) to pre- (cid:127) CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings: vent work-related injuries and illnesses among DHCP as well recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control as health-care–associated infections among patients. The pro- Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/ gram should embody principles of infection control and APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. MMWR 2002;51 occupational health, reflect current science, and adhere to rel- (No. RR-16). evant federal, state, and local regulations and statutes. An (cid:127) CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for infection-control coordinator (e.g., dentist or other DHCP) the management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, knowledgeable or willing to be trained should be assigned and HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophy- responsibility for coordinating the program. The effectiveness laxis. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11). of the infection-control program should be evaluated on a day- (cid:127) Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis to-day basis and over time to help ensure that policies, proce- WR, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Com- dures, and practices are useful, efficient, and successful (see mittee. Guideline for prevention of surgical site infection, Program Evaluation). 1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:250–78. Although the infection-control coordinator remains respon- (cid:127) Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, sible for overall management of the program, creating and main- Shapiro CN, Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control taining a safe work environment ultimately requires the Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for infection 4 MMWR December 19, 2003 control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Con- Bioburden: Microbiological load (i.e., number of viable trol 1998;26:289–354. organisms in or on an object or surface) or organic material on (cid:127) CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommen- a surface or object before decontamination, or sterilization. dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Prac- Also known as bioload or microbial load. tices (ACIP) and the Hospital Infection Control Practices Colony-forming unit (CFU): The minimum number (i.e., Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. tens of millions) of separable cells on the surface of or in semi- RR-18). solid agar medium that give rise to a visible colony of progeny. (cid:127) Rutala WA, Association for Professionals in Infection CFUs can consist of pairs, chains, clusters, or as single cells Control and Epidemiology, Inc. APIC guideline for selec- and are often expressed as colony-forming units per milliliter tion and use of disinfectants. Am J Infect Control (CFUs/mL). 1996;24:313–42. Decontamination: Use of physical or chemical means to (cid:127) Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory remove, inactivate, or destroy pathogens on a surface or item Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospi- so that they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious tals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17:53–80. particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, (cid:127) Larson EL, 1992, 1993, and 1994 Guidelines Committee. use, or disposal. APIC guideline for handwashing and hand antisepsis in Dental treatment water: Nonsterile water used during dental health-care settings. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:251–69. treatment, including irrigation of nonsurgical operative sites (cid:127) CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of and cooling of high-speed rotary and ultrasonic instruments. Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. Disinfectant: A chemical agent used on inanimate objects MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13). (e.g., floors, walls, or sinks) to destroy virtually all recognized (cid:127) CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily all microbial human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to forms (e.g., bacterial endospores). The U.S. Environmental patients during exposure-prone invasive procedures. Protection Agency (EPA) groups disinfectants on the basis of MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8). whether the product label claims limited, general, or hospital (cid:127) Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical disinfectant capabilities. wound infections, 1985. Supersedes guideline for preven- Disinfection: Destruction of pathogenic and other kinds of tion of surgical wound infections published in 1982. microorganisms by physical or chemical means. Disinfection (Originally published in November 1985). Revised. is less lethal than sterilization, because it destroys the majority Infect Control 1986;7:193–200. of recognized pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily (cid:127) Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing all microbial forms (e.g., bacterial spores). Disinfection does and hospital environmental control, 1985. Infect Control not ensure the degree of safety associated with sterilization 1986;7:231–43. processes. Droplet nuclei: Particles <5 µm in diameter formed by dehy- Selected Definitions dration of airborne droplets containing microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air for long periods of time. Alcohol-based hand rub: An alcohol-containing preparation Droplets: Small particles of moisture (e.g., spatter) generated designed for reducing the number of viable microorganisms when a person coughs or sneezes, or when water is converted on the hands. to a fine mist by an aerator or shower head. These particles, Antimicrobial soap: A detergent containing an antiseptic agent. intermediate in size between drops and droplet nuclei, can Antiseptic: A germicide used on skin or living tissue for the contain infectious microorganisms and tend to quickly settle purpose of inhibiting or destroying microorganisms (e.g., from the air such that risk of disease transmission is usually alcohols, chlorhexidine, chlorine, hexachlorophene, iodine, limited to persons in close proximity to the droplet source. chloroxylenol [PCMX], quaternary ammonium compounds, Endotoxin: The lipopolysaccharide of gram-negative bacte- and triclosan). ria, the toxic character of which resides in the lipid protein. Bead sterilizer: A device using glass beads 1.2–1.5 mm Endotoxins can produce pyrogenic reactions in persons diameter and temperatures 217ºC–232ºC for brief exposures exposed to their bacterial component. (e.g., 45 seconds) to inactivate microorganisms. (This term is Germicide: An agent that destroys microorganisms, especially actually a misnomer because it has not been cleared by the pathogenic organisms. Terms with the same suffix (e.g., viru- Food and Drug Administration [FDA] as a sterilizer). cide, fungicide, bactericide, tuberculocide, and sporicide) indi- Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 5 cate agents that destroy the specific microorganism identified Implantable device: Device placed into a surgically or natu- by the prefix. Germicides can be used to inactivate microor- rally formed cavity of the human body and intended to ganisms in or on living tissue (i.e., antiseptics) or on environ- remain there for >30 days. mental surfaces (i.e., disinfectants). Independent water reservoir: Container used to hold water or Hand hygiene: General term that applies to handwashing, other solutions and supply it to handpieces and air and water antiseptic handwash, antiseptic hand rub, or surgical hand syringes attached to a dental unit. The independent reservoir, antisepsis. which isolates the unit from the public water system, can be Health-care–associated infection: Any infection associated with provided as original equipment or as a retrofitted device. a medical or surgical intervention. The term health-care– Intermediate-level disinfection: Disinfection process that associated replaces nosocomial, which is limited to adverse inactivates vegetative bacteria, the majority of fungi, myco- infectious outcomes occurring in hospitals. bacteria, and the majority of viruses (particularly enveloped Hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG): Product used for pro- viruses) but not bacterial spores. phylaxis against HBV infection. HBIG is prepared from plasma Intermediate-level disinfectant: Liquid chemical germicide containing high titers of hepatitis B surface antibody (anti- registered with EPA as a hospital disinfectant and with a label HBs) and provides protection for 3–6 mos. claim of potency as tuberculocidal (Appendix A). Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): Serologic marker on the Latex: Milky white fluid extracted from the rubber tree surface of HBV detected in high levels during acute or chronic Hevea brasiliensis that contains the rubber material cis-1,4 hepatitis. The body normally produces antibodies to surface polyisoprene. antigen as a normal immune response to infection. Low-level disinfection: Process that inactivates the majority Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg): Secreted product of the nucleo- of vegetative bacteria, certain fungi, and certain viruses, but capsid gene of HBV found in serum during acute and chronic cannot be relied on to inactivate resistant microorganisms (e.g., HBV infection. Its presence indicates that the virus is replicat- mycobacteria or bacterial spores). ing and serves as a marker of increased infectivity. Low-level disinfectant: Liquid chemical germicide registered Hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs): Protective antibody with EPA as a hospital disinfectant. OSHA requires low-level against HBsAg. Presence in the blood can indicate past infec- hospital disinfectants also to have a label claim for potency tion with, and immunity to, HBV, or immune response from against HIV and HBV if used for disinfecting clinical contact hepatitis B vaccine. surfaces (Appendix A). Heterotrophic bacteria: Those bacteria requiring an organic Microfilter: Membrane filter used to trap microorganisms carbon source for growth (i.e., deriving energy and carbon from suspended in water. Filters are usually installed on dental unit organic compounds). waterlines as a retrofit device. Microfiltration commonly High-level disinfection: Disinfection process that inactivates occurs at a filter pore size of 0.03–10 µm. Sediment filters vegetative bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses but not commonly found in dental unit water regulators have pore necessarily high numbers of bacterial spores. FDA further sizes of 20–90 µm and do not function as microbiological defines a high-level disinfectant as a sterilant used for a shorter filters. contact time. Nosocomial: Infection acquired in a hospital as a result of Hospital disinfectant: Germicide registered by EPA for use medical care. on inanimate objects in hospitals, clinics, dental offices, and Occupational exposure: Reasonably anticipated skin, eye, other medical-related facilities. Efficacy is demonstrated against mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM Salmonella choleraesuis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomo- that can result from the performance of an employee’s duties. nas aeruginosa. OPIM: Other potentially infectious materials. OPIM is an Iatrogenic: Induced inadvertently by HCP, medical (includ- OSHA term that refers to 1) body fluids including semen, ing dental) treatment, or diagnostic procedures. Used particu- vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural larly in reference to an infectious disease or other complication fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva of treatment. in dental procedures; any body fluid visibly contaminated with Immunization: Process by which a person becomes immune, blood; and all body fluids in situations where differentiating or protected against a disease. Vaccination is defined as the between body fluids is difficult or impossible; 2) any unfixed process of administering a killed or weakened infectious tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human (living organism or a toxoid; however, vaccination does not always or dead); and 3) HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ result in immunity. 6 MMWR December 19, 2003 cultures; HIV- or HBV-containing culture medium or other Review of Science Related solutions; and blood, organs, or other tissues from experimen- to Dental Infection Control tal animals infected with HIV or HBV. Parenteral: Means of piercing mucous membranes or skin Personnel Health Elements barrier through such events as needlesticks, human bites, cuts, of an Infection-Control Program and abrasions. A protective health component for DHCP is an integral part Persistent activity: Prolonged or extended activity that pre- of a dental practice infection-control program. The objectives vents or inhibits proliferation or survival of microorganisms are to educate DHCP regarding the principles of infection after application of a product. This activity can be demon- control, identify work-related infection risks, institute preven- strated by sampling a site minutes or hours after application tive measures, and ensure prompt exposure management and and demonstrating bacterial antimicrobial effectiveness when medical follow-up. Coordination between the dental practice’s compared with a baseline level. Previously, this property was infection-control coordinator and other qualified health-care sometimes termed residual activity. professionals is necessary to provide DHCP with appropriate Prion: Protein particle lacking nucleic acid that has been services. Dental programs in institutional settings, (e.g., hos- implicated as the cause of certain neurodegenerative diseases pitals, health centers, and educational institutions) can coor- (e.g., scrapie, CJD, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy dinate with departments that provide personnel health services. [BSE]). However, the majority of dental practices are in ambulatory, Retraction: Entry of oral fluids and microorganisms into private settings that do not have licensed medical staff and waterlines through negative water pressure. facilities to provide complete on-site health service programs. Seroconversion: The change of a serological test from nega- In such settings, the infection-control coordinator should tive to positive indicating the development of antibodies in establish programs that arrange for site-specific infection- response to infection or immunization. control services from external health-care facilities and pro- Sterile: Free from all living microorganisms; usually described viders before DHCP are placed at risk for exposure. Referral as a probability (e.g., the probability of a surviving microor- arrangements can be made with qualified health-care profes- ganism being 1 in 1 million). sionals in an occupational health program of a hospital, with Sterilization: Use of a physical or chemical procedure to educational institutions, or with health-care facilities that destroy all microorganisms including substantial numbers of offer personnel health services. resistant bacterial spores. Surfactants: Surface-active agents that reduce surface tension Education and Training and help cleaning by loosening, emulsifying, and holding soil Personnel are more likely to comply with an infection- in suspension, to be more readily rinsed away. control program and exposure-control plan if they understand Ultrasonic cleaner: Device that removes debris by a process its rationale (5,13,16). Clearly written policies, procedures, called cavitation, in which waves of acoustic energy are propa- and guidelines can help ensure consistency, efficiency, and gated in aqueous solutions to disrupt the bonds that hold par- effective coordination of activities. Personnel subject to occu- ticulate matter to surfaces. pational exposure should receive infection-control training on Vaccination: See immunization. initial assignment, when new tasks or procedures affect their Vaccine: Product that induces immunity, therefore protect- occupational exposure, and at a minimum, annually (13). ing the body from the disease. Vaccines are administered Education and training should be appropriate to the assigned through needle injections, by mouth, and by aerosol. duties of specific DHCP (e.g., techniques to prevent cross- Washer-disinfector: Automatic unit that cleans and thermally contamination or instrument sterilization). For DHCP who disinfects instruments, by using a high-temperature cycle rather perform tasks or procedures likely to result in occupational than a chemical bath. exposure to infectious agents, training should include 1) a Wicking: Absorption of a liquid by capillary action along a description of their exposure risks; 2) review of prevention strat- thread or through the material (e.g., penetration of liquids egies and infection-control policies and procedures; 3) discus- through undetected holes in a glove). sion regarding how to manage work-related illness and injuries, including PEP; and 4) review of work restrictions for the exposure or infection. Inclusion of DHCP with minimal exposure risks (e.g., administrative employees) in education and training programs might enhance facilitywide understand- Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 7 ing of infection-control principles and the importance of the of work-related illness and work restrictions (if appropriate) program. Educational materials should be appropriate in con- for exposed or infected DHCP. tent and vocabulary for each person’s educational level, lit- Exposure Prevention and Postexposure eracy, and language, as well as be consistent with existing federal, Management state, and local regulations (5,13). Avoiding exposure to blood and OPIM, as well as protec- Immunization Programs tion by immunization, remain primary strategies for reducing DHCP are at risk for exposure to, and possible infection occupationally acquired infections, but occupational exposures with, infectious organisms. Immunizations substantially can still occur (19). A combination of standard precautions, reduce both the number of DHCP susceptible to these dis- engineering, work practice, and administrative controls is the eases and the potential for disease transmission to other DHCP best means to minimize occupational exposures. Written poli- and patients (5,17). Thus, immunizations are an essential part cies and procedures to facilitate prompt reporting, evaluation, of prevention and infection-control programs for DHCP, and counseling, treatment, and medical follow-up of all occupa- a comprehensive immunization policy should be implemented tional exposures should be available to all DHCP. Written for all dental health-care facilities (17,18). The Advisory Com- policies and procedures should be consistent with federal, state, mittee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) provides national and local requirements addressing education and training, guidelines for immunization of HCP, which includes DHCP postexposure management, and exposure reporting (see Pre- (17). Dental practice immunization policies should incorpo- venting Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens). rate current state and federal regulations as well as recommen- DHCP who have contact with patients can also be exposed dations from the U.S. Public Health Service and professional to persons with infectious TB, and should have a baseline tu- organizations (17) (Appendix B). berculin skin test (TST), preferably by using a two-step test, On the basis of documented health-care–associated trans- at the beginning of employment (20). Thus, if an unprotected mission, HCP are considered to be at substantial risk for occupational exposure occurs, TST conversions can be distin- acquiring or transmitting hepatitis B, influenza, measles, guished from positive TST results caused by previous expo- mumps, rubella, and varicella. All of these diseases are vac- sures (20,21). The facility’s level of TB risk will determine the cine-preventable. ACIP recommends that all HCP be vacci- need for routine follow-up TSTs (see Special Considerations). nated or have documented immunity to these diseases (5,17). Medical Conditions, Work-Related Illness, ACIP does not recommend routine immunization of HCP and Work Restrictions against TB (i.e., inoculation with bacille Calmette-Guérin vac- cine) or hepatitis A (17). No vaccine exists for HCV. ACIP DHCP are responsible for monitoring their own health sta- guidelines also provide recommendations regarding immuni- tus. DHCP who have acute or chronic medical conditions zation of HCP with special conditions (e.g., pregnancy, HIV that render them susceptible to opportunistic infection should infection, or diabetes) (5,17). discuss with their personal physicians or other qualified Immunization of DHCP before they are placed at risk for authority whether the condition might affect their ability to exposure remains the most efficient and effective use of vac- safely perform their duties. However, under certain circum- cines in health-care settings. Some educational institutions and stances, health-care facility managers might need to exclude infection-control programs provide immunization schedules DHCP from work or patient contact to prevent further trans- for students and DHCP. OSHA requires that employers make mission of infection (22). Decisions concerning work restric- hepatitis B vaccination available to all employees who have tions are based on the mode of transmission and the period of potential contact with blood or OPIM. Employers are also infectivity of the disease (5) (Table 1). Exclusion policies should required to follow CDC recommendations for vaccinations, 1) be written, 2) include a statement of authority that defines evaluation, and follow-up procedures (13). Nonpatient-care who can exclude DHCP (e.g., personal physicians), and 3) be staff (e.g., administrative or housekeeping) might be included, clearly communicated through education and training. Poli- depending on their potential risk of coming into contact with cies should also encourage DHCP to report illnesses or expo- blood or OPIM. Employers are also required to ensure that sures without jeopardizing wages, benefits, or job status. employees who decline to accept hepatitis B vaccination sign With increasing concerns regarding bloodborne pathogens and an appropriate declination statement (13). DHCP unable or introduction of universal precautions, use of latex gloves among unwilling to be vaccinated as required or recommended should HCP has increased markedly (7,23). Increased use of these gloves be educated regarding their exposure risks, infection-control has been accompanied by increased reports of allergic reactions policies and procedures for the facility, and the management to natural rubber latex among HCP, DHCP, and patients 8 MMWR December 19, 2003 TABLE 1. Suggested work restrictions for health-care personnel infected with or exposed to major infectious diseases in health- care settings, in the absence of state and local regulations* Disease/problem Work restriction Duration Conjunctivitis Restrict from patient contact and contact with patient’s Until discharge ceases environment. Cytomegalovirus infection No restriction Diarrheal disease Acute stage (diarrhea with other symptoms) Restrict from patient contact, contact with patient’s Until symptoms resolve environment, and food-handling. Convalescent stage, Salmonella species Restrict from care of patients at high risk. Until symptoms resolve; consult with local and state health authorities regarding need for negative stool cultures Enteroviral infection Restrict from care of infants, neonates, and Until symptoms resolve immunocompromised patients and their environments. Hepatitis A Restrict from patient contact, contact with patient’s Until 7 days after onset of jaundice environment, and food-handing. Hepatitis B Personnel with acute or chronic hepatitis B No restriction†; refer to state regulations. Standard surface antigenemia who do not perform precautions should always be followed. exposure-prone procedures Personnel with acute or chronic hepatitis B Do not perform exposure-prone invasive procedures until Until hepatitis B e antigen is negative e antigenemia who perform exposure-prone counsel from a review panel has been sought; panel procedures should review and recommend procedures that personnel can perform, taking into account specific procedures as well as skill and technique. Standard precautions should always be observed. Refer to state and local regulations or recommendations. Hepatitis C No restrictions on professional activity.† HCV-positive health-care personnel should follow aseptic technique and standard precautions. Herpes simplex Genital No restriction Hands (herpetic whitlow) Restrict from patient contact and contact with patient’s Until lesions heal environment. Orofacial Evaluate need to restrict from care of patients at high risk. Human immunodeficiency virus; personnel who Do not perform exposure-prone invasive procedures until perform exposure-prone procedures counsel from an expert review panel has been sought; panel should review and recommend procedures that personnel can perform, taking into account specific procedures as well as skill and technique. Standard precautions should always be observed. Refer to state and local regulations or recommendations. Measles Active Exclude from duty Until 7 days after the rash appears Postexposure (susceptible personnel) Exclude from duty From fifth day after first exposure through twenty-first day after last exposure, or 4 days after rash appears Meningococcal infection Exclude from duty Until 24 hours after start of effective therapy Mumps Active Exclude from duty Until 9 days after onset of parotitis Postexposure (susceptible personnel) Exclude from duty From twelfth day after first exposure through twenty-sixth day after last exposure, or until 9 days after onset of parotitis Source: Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289–354. *Modified from recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). † Unless epidemiologically linked to transmission of infection. § Those susceptible to varicella and who are at increased risk of complications of varicella (e.g., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age). ¶ Patients at high risk as defined by ACIP for complications of influenza. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 9 TABLE 1. (Continued) Suggested work restrictions for health-care personnel infected with or exposed to major infectious diseases in health-care settings, in the absence of state and local regulations* Disease/problem Work restriction Duration Pediculosis Restrict from patient contact Until treated and observed to be free of adult and immature lice Pertussis Active Exclude from duty From beginning of catarrhal stage through third week after onset of paroxysms, or until 5 days after start of effective antibiotic therapy Postexposure (asymptomatic personnel) No restriction, prophylaxis recommended Postexposure (symptomatic personnel) Exclude from duty Until 5 days after start of effective antibiotic therapy Rubella Active Exclude from duty Until 5 days after rash appears Postexposure (susceptible personnel) Exclude from duty From seventh day after first exposure through twenty-first day after last exposure Staphylococcus aureus infection Active, draining skin lesions Restrict from contact with patients and patient’s Until lesions have resolved environment or food handling. Carrier state No restriction unless personnel are epidemiologically linked to transmission of the organism Streptococcal infection, group A Restrict from patient care, contact with patient’s Until 24 hours after adequate treatment started environment, and food-handling. Tuberculosis Active disease Exclude from duty Until proved noninfectious PPD converter No restriction Varicella (chicken pox) Active Exclude from duty Until all lesions dry and crust Postexposure (susceptible personnel) Exclude from duty From tenth day after first exposure through twenty-first day (twenty-eighth day if varicella-zoster immune globulin [VZIG] administered) after last exposure. Zoster (shingles) Localized, in healthy person Cover lesions, restrict from care of patients§ at high risk Until all lesions dry and crust Generalized or localized in immunosup- Restrict from patient contact Until all lesions dry and crust pressed person Postexposure (susceptible personnel) Restrict from patient contact From tenth day after first exposure through twenty-first day (twenty-eighth day if VZIG administered) after last exposure; or, if varicella occurs, when lesions crust and dry Viral respiratory infection, acute febrile Consider excluding from the care of patients at high risk¶ Until acute symptoms resolve or contact with such patients’ environments during community outbreak of respiratory syncytial virus and influenza Source: Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289–354. *Modified from recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). † Unless epidemiologically linked to transmission of infection. § Those susceptible to varicella and who are at increased risk of complications of varicella (e.g., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age). ¶ Patients at high risk as defined by ACIP for complications of influenza. 10 MMWR December 19, 2003 (24–30), as well as increased reports of irritant and allergic con- infected blood can result in transmission from patient to tact dermatitis from frequent and repeated use of hand-hygiene DHCP, from DHCP to patient, and from one patient to products, exposure to chemicals, and glove use. another. The opportunity for transmission is greatest from DHCP should be familiar with the signs and symptoms of patient to DHCP, who frequently encounter patient blood and latex sensitivity (5,31–33). A physician should evaluate DHCP blood-contaminated saliva during dental procedures. exhibiting symptoms of latex allergy, because further exposure Since 1992, no HIV transmission from DHCP to patients could result in a serious allergic reaction. A diagnosis is made has been reported, and the last HBV transmission from DHCP through medical history, physical examination, and diagnos- to patients was reported in 1987. HCV transmission from tic tests. Procedures should be in place for minimizing latex- DHCP to patients has not been reported. The majority of related health problems among DHCP and patients while DHCP infected with a bloodborne virus do not pose a risk to protecting them from infectious materials. These procedures patients because they do not perform activities meeting the should include 1) reducing exposures to latex-containing necessary conditions for transmission. For DHCP to pose a materials by using appropriate work practices, 2) training and risk for bloodborne virus transmission to patients, DHCP must educating DHCP, 3) monitoring symptoms, and 4) substitut- 1) be viremic (i.e., have infectious virus circulating in the blood- ing nonlatex products where appropriate (32) (see Contact stream); 2) be injured or have a condition (e.g., weeping der- Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity). matitis) that allows direct exposure to their blood or other infectious body fluids; and 3) enable their blood or infectious Maintenance of Records, Data Management, body fluid to gain direct access to a patient’s wound, trauma- and Confidentiality tized tissue, mucous membranes, or similar portal of entry. The health status of DHCP can be monitored by maintain- Although an infected DHCP might be viremic, unless the sec- ing records of work-related medical evaluations, screening tests, ond and third conditions are also met, transmission cannot immunizations, exposures, and postexposure management. occur. Such records must be kept in accordance with all applicable The risk of occupational exposure to bloodborne viruses is state and federal laws. Examples of laws that might apply largely determined by their prevalence in the patient popula- include the Privacy Rule of the Health Insurance Portability tion and the nature and frequency of contact with blood and and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 45 CFR 160 and body fluids through percutaneous or permucosal routes of 164, and the OSHA Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne exposure. The risk of infection after exposure to a bloodborne Pathogens; Final Rule 29 CFR 1910.1030(h)(1)(i–iv) (34,13). virus is influenced by inoculum size, route of exposure, and The HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to covered entities, includ- susceptibility of the exposed HCP (12). The majority of ing certain defined health providers, health-care clearinghouses, attention has been placed on the bloodborne pathogens HBV, and health plans. OSHA requires employers to ensure that HCV, and HIV, and these pathogens present different levels certain information contained in employee medical records is of risk to DHCP. 1) kept confidential; 2) not disclosed or reported without the Hepatitis B Virus employee’s express written consent to any person within or outside the workplace except as required by the OSHA stan- HBV is a well-recognized occupational risk for HCP (36,37). dard; and 3) maintained by the employer for at least the dura- HBV is transmitted by percutaneous or mucosal exposure to tion of employment plus 30 years. Dental practices that blood or body fluids of a person with either acute or chronic coordinate their infection-control program with off-site pro- HBV infection. Persons infected with HBV can transmit the viders might consult OSHA’s Bloodborne Pathogen standard virus for as long as they are HBsAg-positive. The risk of HBV and employee Access to Medical and Exposure Records stan- transmission is highly related to the HBeAg status of the source dard, as well as other applicable local, state, and federal laws, person. In studies of HCP who sustained injuries from needles to determine a location for storing health records (13,35). contaminated with blood containing HBV, the risk of devel- oping clinical hepatitis if the blood was positive for both HBsAg Preventing Transmission and HBeAg was 22%–31%; the risk of developing serologic of Bloodborne Pathogens evidence of HBV infection was 37%–62% (19). By compari- son, the risk of developing clinical hepatitis from a needle con- Although transmission of bloodborne pathogens (e.g., HBV, taminated with HBsAg-positive, HBeAg-negative blood was HCV, and HIV) in dental health-care settings can have seri- 1%–6%, and the risk of developing serologic evidence of HBV ous consequences, such transmission is rare. Exposure to infection, 23%–37% (38). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 11 Blood contains the greatest proportion of HBV infectious from dentist to patient has not been reported since 1987, pos- particle titers of all body fluids and is the most critical vehicle sibly reflecting such factors as 1) adoption of universal precau- of transmission in the health-care setting. HBsAg is also found tions, 2) routine glove use, 3) increased levels of immunity as in multiple other body fluids, including breast milk, bile, cere- a result of hepatitis B vaccination of DHCP, 4) implementa- brospinal fluid, feces, nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, tion of the 1991 OSHA bloodborne pathogen standard (68), sweat, and synovial fluid. However, the majority of body flu- and 5) incomplete ascertainment and reporting. Only one case ids are not efficient vehicles for transmission because they con- of patient-to-patient transmission of HBV in the dental set- tain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite the presence of ting has been documented (CDC, unpublished data, 2003). HBsAg (19). The concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can In this case, appropriate office infection-control procedures be 100–1,000-fold greater than the concentration of infec- were being followed, and the exact mechanism of transmis- tious HBV particles (39). sion was undetermined. Although percutaneous injuries are among the most effi- Because of the high risk of HBV infection among HCP, cient modes of HBV transmission, these exposures probably DHCP who perform tasks that might involve contact with account for only a minority of HBV infections among HCP. blood, blood-contaminated body substances, other body flu- In multiple investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks, ids, or sharps should be vaccinated (2,13,17,19,69). Vaccina- the majority of infected HCP could not recall an overt percu- tion can protect both DHCP and patients from HBV infection taneous injury (40,41), although in certain studies, approxi- and, whenever possible, should be completed when dentists mately one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a patient or other DHCP are in training and before they have contact who was HBsAg-positive (42,43). In addition, HBV has been with blood. demonstrated to survive in dried blood at room temperature Prevaccination serological testing for previous infection is on environmental surfaces for <1 week (44). Thus, HBV not indicated, although it can be cost-effective where preva- infections that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupa- lence of infection is expected to be high in a group of potential tional exposure or occupational percutaneous injury might have vacinees (e.g., persons who have emigrated from areas with resulted from direct or indirect blood or body fluid exposures high rates of HBV infection). DHCP should be tested for anti- that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions, HBs 1–2 months after completion of the 3-dose vaccination burns, other lesions, or on mucosal surfaces (45–47). The series (17). DHCP who do not develop an adequate antibody potential for HBV transmission through contact with envi- response (i.e., anti-HBs <10 mIU/mL) to the primary vaccine ronmental surfaces has been demonstrated in investigations of series should complete a second 3-dose vaccine series or be HBV outbreaks among patients and HCP in hemodialysis units evaluated to determine if they are HBsAg-positive (17). (48–50). Revaccinated persons should be retested for anti-HBs at the Since the early 1980s, occupational infections among HCP completion of the second vaccine series. Approximately half have declined because of vaccine use and adherence to univer- of nonresponders to the primary series will respond to a sec- sal precautions (51). Among U.S. dentists, >90% have been ond 3-dose series. If no antibody response occurs after the vaccinated, and serologic evidence of past HBV infection second series, testing for HBsAg should be performed (17). decreased from prevaccine levels of 14% in 1972 to approxi- Persons who prove to be HBsAg-positive should be counseled mately 9% in 1992 (52). During 1993–2001, levels remained regarding how to prevent HBV transmission to others and relatively unchanged (Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Den- regarding the need for medical evaluation. Nonresponders to tal Association, Chicago, Illinois, personal communication, vaccination who are HBsAg-negative should be considered June 2003). Infection rates can be expected to decline further susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled regard- as vaccination rates remain high among young dentists and as ing precautions to prevent HBV infection and the need to older dentists with lower vaccination rates and higher rates of obtain HBIG prophylaxis for any known or probable parenteral infection retire. exposure to HBsAg-positive blood. Although the potential for transmission of bloodborne Vaccine-induced antibodies decline gradually over time, and infections from DHCP to patients is considered limited 60% of persons who initially respond to vaccination will lose (53–55), precise risks have not been quantified by carefully detectable antibodies over 12 years. Even so, immunity con- designed epidemiologic studies (53,56,57). Reports published tinues to prevent clinical disease or detectable viral infection during 1970–1987 describe nine clusters in which patients (17). Booster doses of vaccine and periodic serologic testing to were thought to be infected with HBV through treatment by monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vac- an infected DHCP (58–67). However, transmission of HBV cine series are not necessary for vaccine responders (17). 12 MMWR December 19, 2003 Hepatitis D Virus HCP, including 33 dentists or dental students (55,93). No additional cases of transmission were documented. An estimated 4% of persons with acute HBV infection are Prospective studies worldwide indicate the average risk of also infected with hepatitis Delta virus (HDV). Discovered in HIV infection after a single percutaneous exposure to 1977, HDV is a defective bloodborne virus requiring the pres- HIV-infected blood is 0.3% (range: 0.2%–0.5%) (94). After ence of HBV to replicate. Patients coinfected with HBV and an exposure of mucous membranes in the eye, nose, or mouth, HDV have substantially higher mortality rates than those the risk is approximately 0.1% (76). The precise risk of trans- infected with HBV alone. Because HDV infection is depen- mission after skin exposure remains unknown but is believed dent on HBV for replication, immunization to prevent HBV to be even smaller than that for mucous membrane exposure. infection, through either pre- or postexposure prophylaxis, can Certain factors affect the risk of HIV transmission after an also prevent HDV infection (70). occupational exposure. Laboratory studies have determined if Hepatitis C Virus needles that pass through latex gloves are solid rather than Hepatitis C virus appears not to be transmitted efficiently hollow-bore, or are of small gauge (e.g., anesthetic needles through occupational exposures to blood. Follow-up studies commonly used in dentistry), they transfer less blood (36). In of HCP exposed to HCV-infected blood through percutane- a retrospective case-control study of HCP, an increased risk ous or other sharps injuries have determined a low incidence for HIV infection was associated with exposure to a relatively of seroconversion (mean: 1.8%; range, 0%–7%) (71–74). One large volume of blood, as indicated by a deep injury with a study determined transmission occurred from hollow-bore device that was visibly contaminated with the patient’s blood, needles but not other sharps (72). Although these studies have or a procedure that involved a needle placed in a vein or artery not documented seroconversion associated with mucous mem- (95). The risk was also increased if the exposure was to blood brane or nonintact skin exposure, at least two cases of HCV from patients with terminal illnesses, possibly reflecting the transmission from a blood splash to the conjunctiva (75,76) higher titer of HIV in late-stage AIDS. and one case of simultaneous transmission of HCV and HIV Exposure Prevention Methods after nonintact skin exposure have been reported (77). Avoiding occupational exposures to blood is the primary Data are insufficient to estimate the occupational risk of way to prevent transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV, to HCP HCV infection among HCP, but the majority of studies indi- in health-care settings (19,96,97). Exposures occur through cate the prevalence of HCV infection among dentists, sur- percutaneous injury (e.g., a needlestick or cut with a sharp geons, and hospital-based HCP is similar to that among the object), as well as through contact between potentially infec- general population, approximately 1%–2% (78–86). In a study tious blood, tissues, or other body fluids and mucous mem- that evaluated risk factors for infection, a history of uninten- branes of the eye, nose, mouth, or nonintact skin (e.g., exposed tional needlesticks was the only occupational risk factor inde- skin that is chapped, abraded, or shows signs of dermatitis). pendently associated with HCV infection (80). Observational studies and surveys indicate that percutane- No studies of transmission from HCV-infected DHCP to ous injuries among general dentists and oral surgeons occur patients have been reported, and the risk for such transmis- less frequently than among general and orthopedic surgeons sion appears limited. Multiple reports have been published and have decreased in frequency since the mid-1980s (98–102). describing transmission from HCV-infected surgeons, which This decline has been attributed to safer work practices, safer apparently occurred during performance of invasive procedures; instrumentation or design, and continued DHCP education the overall risk for infection averaged 0.17% (87–90). (103,104). Percutaneous injuries among DHCP usually Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1) occur outside the patient’s mouth, thereby posing less risk In the United States, the risk of HIV transmission in dental for recontact with patient tissues; 2) involve limited amounts settings is extremely low. As of December 2001, a total of 57 of blood; and 3) are caused by burs, syringe needles, labora- cases of HIV seroconversion had been documented among tory knives, and other sharp instruments (99–102,105,106). HCP, but none among DHCP, after occupational exposure to Injuries among oral surgeons might occur more frequently a known HIV-infected source (91). Transmission of HIV to during fracture reductions using wires (104,107). Experience, six patients of a single dentist with AIDS has been reported, as measured by years in practice, does not appear to affect the but the mode of transmission could not be determined risk of injury among general dentists or oral surgeons (2,92,93). As of September 30, 1993, CDC had information (100,104,107). regarding test results of >22,000 patients of 63 HIV-infected Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 13 The majority of exposures in dentistry are preventable, and Work-practice controls for needles and other sharps include methods to reduce the risk of blood contacts have included placing used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades, use of standard precautions, use of devices with features engi- and other sharp items in appropriate puncture-resistant con- neered to prevent sharp injuries, and modifications of work tainers located as close as feasible to where the items were used practices. These approaches might have contributed to the (2,7,13,113–115). In addition, used needles should never be decrease in percutaneous injuries among dentists during recapped or otherwise manipulated by using both hands, or recent years (98–100,103). However, needlesticks and other any other technique that involves directing the point of a needle blood contacts continue to occur, which is a concern because toward any part of the body (2,7,13,97,113,114). A one- percutaneous injuries pose the greatest risk of transmission. handed scoop technique, a mechanical device designed for Standard precautions include use of PPE (e.g., gloves, masks, holding the needle cap to facilitate one-handed recapping, or protective eyewear or face shield, and gowns) intended to pre- an engineered sharps injury protection device (e.g., needles vent skin and mucous membrane exposures. Other protective with resheathing mechanisms) should be employed for recap- equipment (e.g., finger guards while suturing) might also ping needles between uses and before disposal reduce injuries during dental procedures (104). (2,7,13,113,114). DHCP should never bend or break needles Engineering controls are the primary method to reduce before disposal because this practice requires unnecessary exposures to blood and OPIM from sharp instruments and manipulation. Before attempting to remove needles from needles. These controls are frequently technology-based and nondisposable aspirating syringes, DHCP should recap them often incorporate safer designs of instruments and devices (e.g., to prevent injuries. For procedures involving multiple injec- self-sheathing anesthetic needles and dental units designed to tions with a single needle, the practitioner should recap the shield burs in handpieces) to reduce percutaneous injuries needle between injections by using a one-handed technique or (101,103,108). use a device with a needle-resheathing mechanism. Passing a Work-practice controls establish practices to protect DHCP syringe with an unsheathed needle should be avoided because whose responsibilities include handling, using, assembling, or of the potential for injury. processing sharp devices (e.g., needles, scalers, laboratory util- Additional information for developing a safety program and ity knives, burs, explorers, and endodontic files) or sharps dis- for identifying and evaluating safer dental devices is available at posal containers. Work-practice controls can include removing (cid:127) http://www.cdc.gov/OralHealth/infectioncontrol/ burs before disassembling the handpiece from the dental unit, forms.htm (forms for screening and evaluating safer den- restricting use of fingers in tissue retraction or palpation dur- tal devices), and ing suturing and administration of anesthesia, and minimiz- (cid:127) http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/bbp (state legislation on ing potentially uncontrolled movements of such instruments needlestick safety). as scalers or laboratory knives (101,105). Postexposure Management and Prophylaxis As indicated, needles are a substantial source of percutane- ous injury in dental practice, and engineering and work- Postexposure management is an integral component of a practice controls for needle handling are of particular complete program to prevent infection after an occupational importance. In 2001, revisions to OSHA’s bloodborne patho- exposure to blood. During dental procedures, saliva is pre- gens standard as mandated by the Needlestick Safety and Pre- dictably contaminated with blood (7,114). Even when blood vention Act of 2000 became effective. These revisions clarify is not visible, it can still be present in limited quantities and the need for employers to consider safer needle devices as they therefore is considered a potentially infectious material by become available and to involve employees directly respon- OSHA (13,19). A qualified health-care professional should sible for patient care (e.g., dentists, hygienists, and dental evaluate any occupational exposure incident to blood or OPIM, assistants) in identifying and choosing such devices (109). Safer including saliva, regardless of whether blood is visible, in den- versions of sharp devices used in hospital settings have become tal settings (13). available (e.g., blunt suture needles, phlebotomy devices, and Dental practices and laboratories should establish written, butterfly needles), and their impact on reducing injuries has comprehensive programs that include hepatitis B vaccination been documented (110–112). Aspirating anesthetic syringes and postexposure management protocols that 1) describe the that incorporate safety features have been developed for den- types of contact with blood or OPIM that can place DHCP at tal procedures, but the low injury rates in dentistry limit risk for infection; 2) describe procedures for promptly report- assessment of their effect on reducing injuries among DHCP. ing and evaluating such exposures; and 3) identify a health- 14 MMWR December 19, 2003 care professional who is qualified to provide counseling and the source was infected with HIV, the stage of disease, perform all medical evaluations and procedures in accordance history of antiretroviral therapy, and viral load, if known. with current recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Ser- (cid:127) Details regarding the exposed person (e.g., hepatitis B vac- vice (PHS), including PEP with chemotherapeutic drugs when cination and vaccine-response status). indicated. DHCP, including students, who might reasonably (cid:127) Details regarding counseling, postexposure management, be considered at risk for occupational exposure to blood or and follow-up. OPIM should be taught strategies to prevent contact with blood Each occupational exposure should be evaluated individually or OPIM and the principles of postexposure management, for its potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and HIV, based on including PEP options, as part of their job orientation and the following: training. Educational programs for DHCP and students should (cid:127) The type and amount of body substance involved. emphasize reporting all exposures to blood or OPIM as soon (cid:127) The type of exposure (e.g., percutaneous injury, mucous as possible, because certain interventions have to be initiated membrane or nonintact skin exposure, or bites resulting promptly to be effective. Policies should be consistent with in blood exposure to either person involved). the practices and procedures for worker protection required (cid:127) The infection status of the source. by OSHA and with current PHS recommendations for man- (cid:127) The susceptibility of the exposed person (19). aging occupational exposures to blood (13,19). All of these factors should be considered in assessing the risk After an occupational blood exposure, first aid should be for infection and the need for further follow-up (e.g., PEP). administered as necessary. Puncture wounds and other inju- During 1990–1998, PHS published guidelines for PEP and ries to the skin should be washed with soap and water; other management of health-care worker exposures to HBV, mucous membranes should be flushed with water. No evidence HCV, or HIV (69,116–119). In 2001, these recommenda- exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid tions were updated and consolidated into one set of PHS guide- by squeezing the wound further reduces the risk of bloodborne lines (19). The new guidelines reflect the availability of new pathogen transmission; however, use of antiseptics is not con- antiretroviral agents, new information regarding the use and traindicated. The application of caustic agents (e.g., bleach) safety of HIV PEP, and considerations regarding employing or the injection of antiseptics or disinfectants into the wound HIV PEP when resistance of the source patient’s virus to is not recommended (19). Exposed DHCP should immedi- antiretroviral agents is known or suspected. In addition, the ately report the exposure to the infection-control coordinator 2001 guidelines provide guidance to clinicians and exposed or other designated person, who should initiate referral to the HCP regarding when to consider HIV PEP and recommen- qualified health-care professional and complete necessary dations for PEP regimens (19). reports. Because multiple factors contribute to the risk of infection after an occupational exposure to blood, the follow- Hand Hygiene ing information should be included in the exposure report, Hand hygiene (e.g., handwashing, hand antisepsis, or surgi- recorded in the exposed person’s confidential medical record, cal hand antisepsis) substantially reduces potential pathogens and provided to the qualified health-care professional: on the hands and is considered the single most critical mea- (cid:127) Date and time of exposure. sure for reducing the risk of transmitting organisms to (cid:127) Details of the procedure being performed, including where patients and HCP (120–123). Hospital-based studies have and how the exposure occurred and whether the exposure demonstrated that noncompliance with hand hygiene prac- involved a sharp device, the type and brand of device, and tices is associated with health-care–associated infections and how and when during its handling the exposure occurred. the spread of multiresistant organisms. Noncompliance also (cid:127) Details of the exposure, including its severity and the type has been a major contributor to outbreaks (123). The preva- and amount of fluid or material. For a percutaneous injury, lence of health-care–associated infections decreases as adher- severity might be measured by the depth of the wound, ence of HCP to recommended hand hygiene measures gauge of the needle, and whether fluid was injected; for a improves (124–126). skin or mucous membrane exposure, the estimated vol- The microbial flora of the skin, first described in 1938, con- ume of material, duration of contact, and the condition sist of transient and resident microorganisms (127). Transient of the skin (e.g., chapped, abraded, or intact) should be flora, which colonize the superficial layers of the skin, are easier noted. to remove by routine handwashing. They are often acquired (cid:127) Details regarding whether the source material was known by HCP during direct contact with patients or contaminated to contain HIV or other bloodborne pathogens, and, if environmental surfaces; these organisms are most frequently Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 15 associated with health-care–associated infections. Resident flora applied) is critical because microorganisms can colonize on attached to deeper layers of the skin are more resistant to hands in the moist environment underneath gloves (122). removal and less likely to be associated with such infections. Alcohol hand rubs are rapidly germicidal when applied to The preferred method for hand hygiene depends on the type the skin but should include such antiseptics as chlorhexidine, of procedure, the degree of contamination, and the desired quaternary ammonium compounds, octenidine, or triclosan persistence of antimicrobial action on the skin (Table 2). For to achieve persistent activity (130). Factors that can influence routine dental examinations and nonsurgical procedures, the effectiveness of the surgical hand antisepsis in addition to handwashing and hand antisepsis is achieved by using either a the choice of antiseptic agent include duration and technique plain or antimicrobial soap and water. If the hands are not of scrubbing, as well as condition of the hands, and techniques visibly soiled, an alcohol-based hand rub is adequate. used for drying and gloving. CDC’s 2002 guideline on hand The purpose of surgical hand antisepsis is to eliminate tran- hygiene in health-care settings provides more complete infor- sient flora and reduce resident flora for the duration of a pro- mation (123). cedure to prevent introduction of organisms in the operative Selection of Antiseptic Agents wound, if gloves become punctured or torn. Skin bacteria can rapidly multiply under surgical gloves if hands are washed with Selecting the most appropriate antiseptic agent for hand soap that is not antimicrobial (127,128). Thus, an antimicro- hygiene requires consideration of multiple factors. Essential bial soap or alcohol hand rub with persistent activity should performance characteristics of a product (e.g., the spectrum be used before surgical procedures (129–131). and persistence of activity and whether or not the agent is fast- Agents used for surgical hand antisepsis should substantially acting) should be determined before selecting a product. reduce microorganisms on intact skin, contain a nonirritating Delivery system, cost per use, reliable vendor support and sup- antimicrobial preparation, have a broad spectrum of activity, ply are also considerations. Because HCP acceptance is a be fast-acting, and have a persistent effect (121,132–135). major factor regarding compliance with recommended hand Persistence (i.e., extended antimicrobial activity that prevents hygiene protocols (122,123,147,148), considering DHCP or inhibits survival of microorganisms after the product is needs is critical and should include possible chemical allergies, TABLE 2. Hand-hygiene methods and indications Method Agent Purpose Duration (minimum) Indication* Routine handwash Water and nonantimicrobial soap (e.g., Remove soil and transient 15 seconds§ Before and after treating each patient plain soap†) microorganisms (e.g., before glove placement and after glove removal). After barehanded Antiseptic handwash Water and antimicrobial soap (e.g., Remove or destroy 15 seconds§ touching of inanimate objects likely to be chlorhexidine, iodine and iodophors, transient microorganisms contaminated by blood or saliva. Before chloroxylenol [PCMX], triclosan) and reduce resident flora leaving the dental operatory or the dental laboratory. When visibly soiled.¶ Before Antiseptic hand rub Alcohol-based hand rub¶ Remove or destroy Rub hands until the regloving after removing gloves that are transient microorganisms agent is dry¶ torn, cut, or punctured. and reduce resident flora Surgical antisepsis Water and antimicrobial soap (e.g., Remove or destroy 2–6 minutes Before donning sterile surgeon’s gloves chlorhexidine, iodine and iodophors, transient microorganisms for surgical procedures†† chloroxylenol [PCMX], triclosan) and reduce resident flora Follow manufacturer (persistent effect) instructions for Water and non-antimicrobial soap (e.g., surgical hand-scrub plain soap†) followed by an alcohol-based product with surgical hand-scrub product with persistent activity¶** persistent activity * (7,9,11,13,113,120–123,125,126,136–138). † Pathogenic organisms have been found on or around bar soap during and after use (139). Use of liquid soap with hands-free dispensing controls is preferable. § Time reported as effective in removing most transient flora from the skin. For most procedures, a vigorous rubbing together of all surfaces of premoistened lathered hands and fingers for >15 seconds, followed by rinsing under a stream of cool or tepid water is recommended (9,120,123,140,141). Hands should always be dried thoroughly before donning gloves. ¶ Alcohol-based hand rubs should contain 60%–95% ethanol or isopropanol and should not be used in the presence of visible soil or organic material. If using an alcohol-based hand rub, apply adequate amount to palm of one hand and rub hands together, covering all surfaces of the hands and fingers, until hands are dry. Follow manufacturer’s recommendations regarding the volume of product to use. If hands feel dry after rubbing them together for 10–15 seconds, an insufficient volume of product likely was applied. The drying effect of alcohol can be reduced or eliminated by adding 1%–3% glycerol or other skin-conditioning agents (123). ** After application of alcohol-based surgical hand-scrub product with persistent activity as recommended, allow hands and forearms to dry thoroughly and immediately don sterile surgeon’s gloves (144,145). Follow manufacturer instructions (122,123,137,146). †† Before beginning surgical hand scrub, remove all arm jewelry and any hand jewelry that may make donning gloves more difficult, cause gloves to tear more readily (142,143), or interfere with glove usage (e.g., ability to wear the correct-sized glove or altered glove integrity). 16 MMWR December 19, 2003 skin integrity after repeated use, compatibility with lotions used, wearers of artificial nails than among nonwearers, both before and offensive agent ingredients (e.g., scent). Discussing spe- and after handwashing (157–160). In addition, artificial fin- cific preparations or ingredients used for hand antisepsis is gernails or extenders have been epidemiologically implicated beyond the scope of this report. DHCP should choose from in multiple outbreaks involving fungal and bacterial infections commercially available HCP handwashes when selecting agents in hospital intensive-care units and operating rooms (161– for hand antisepsis or surgical hand antisepsis. 164). Freshly applied nail polish on natural nails does not increase the microbial load from periungual skin if fingernails Storage and Dispensing of Hand Care are short; however, chipped nail polish can harbor added bac- Products teria (165,166). Handwashing products, including plain (i.e., non- Jewelry antimicrobial) soap and antiseptic products, can become con- taminated or support the growth of microorganisms (122). Studies have demonstrated that skin underneath rings is more Liquid products should be stored in closed containers and dis- heavily colonized than comparable areas of skin on fingers pensed from either disposable containers or containers that without rings (167–170). In a study of intensive-care nurses, are washed and dried thoroughly before refilling. Soap should multivariable analysis determined rings were the only substan- not be added to a partially empty dispenser, because this prac- tial risk factor for carriage of gram-negative bacilli and Staphy- tice of topping off might lead to bacterial contamination lococcus aureus, and the concentration of organisms correlated (149,150). Store and dispense products according to manu- with the number of rings worn (170). However, two other facturers’ directions. studies demonstrated that mean bacterial colony counts on hands after handwashing were similar among persons wearing Lotions rings and those not wearing rings (169,171). Whether wear- The primary defense against infection and transmission of ing rings increases the likelihood of transmitting a pathogen is pathogens is healthy, unbroken skin. Frequent handwashing unknown; further studies are needed to establish whether rings with soaps and antiseptic agents can cause chronic irritant con- result in higher transmission of pathogens in health-care set- tact dermatitis among DHCP. Damage to the skin changes tings. However, rings and decorative nail jewelry can make skin flora, resulting in more frequent colonization by staphy- donning gloves more difficult and cause gloves to tear more lococci and gram-negative bacteria (151,152). The potential readily (142,143). Thus, jewelry should not interfere with glove of detergents to cause skin irritation varies considerably, but use (e.g., impair ability to wear the correct-sized glove or alter can be reduced by adding emollients. Lotions are often rec- glove integrity). ommended to ease the dryness resulting from frequent handwashing and to prevent dermatitis from glove use Personal Protective Equipment (153,154). However, petroleum-based lotion formulations can PPE is designed to protect the skin and the mucous mem- weaken latex gloves and increase permeability. For that reason, branes of the eyes, nose, and mouth of DHCP from exposure lotions that contain petroleum or other oil emollients should to blood or OPIM. Use of rotary dental and surgical instru- only be used at the end of the work day (122,155). Dental ments (e.g., handpieces or ultrasonic scalers) and air-water practitioners should obtain information from lotion manu- syringes creates a visible spray that contains primarily large- facturers regarding interaction between lotions, gloves, dental particle droplets of water, saliva, blood, microorganisms, and materials, and antimicrobial products. other debris. This spatter travels only a short distance and settles Fingernails and Artificial Nails out quickly, landing on the floor, nearby operatory surfaces, Although the relationship between fingernail length and DHCP, or the patient. The spray also might contain certain wound infection is unknown, keeping nails short is consid- aerosols (i.e., particles of respirable size, <10 µm). Aerosols can ered key because the majority of flora on the hands are found remain airborne for extended periods and can be inhaled. How- under and around the fingernails (156). Fingernails should be ever, they should not be confused with the large-particle spat- short enough to allow DHCP to thoroughly clean underneath ter that makes up the bulk of the spray from handpieces and them and prevent glove tears (122). Sharp nail edges or bro- ultrasonic scalers. Appropriate work practices, including use of ken nails are also likely to increase glove failure. Long artificial dental dams (172) and high-velocity air evacuation, should or natural nails can make donning gloves more difficult and minimize dissemination of droplets, spatter, and aerosols (2). can cause gloves to tear more readily. Hand carriage of gram- Primary PPE used in oral health-care settings includes gloves, negative organisms has been determined to be greater among surgical masks, protective eyewear, face shields, and protective Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 17 clothing (e.g., gowns and jackets). All PPE should be removed material for incoming air and how well the face piece fits or before DHCP leave patient-care areas (13). Reusable PPE (e.g., seals to the face (e.g., qualitatively or quantitatively tested in a clinician or patient protective eyewear and face shields) should reliable way to obtain a face-seal leakage of <10% and to fit be cleaned with soap and water, and when visibly soiled, dis- the different facial sizes and characteristics of HCP). infected between patients, according to the manufacturer’s When respirators are used while treating patients with dis- directions (2,13). Wearing gloves, surgical masks, protective eases requiring airborne-transmission precautions (e.g., TB), eyewear, and protective clothing in specified circumstances to they should be used in the context of a complete respiratory reduce the risk of exposures to bloodborne pathogens is man- protection program (175). This program should include train- dated by OSHA (13). General work clothes (e.g., uniforms, ing and fit testing to ensure an adequate seal between the edges scrubs, pants, and shirts) are neither intended to protect against of the respirator and the wearer’s face. Detailed information a hazard nor considered PPE. regarding respirator programs, including fit-test procedures are available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/99-143.html (174,176). Masks, Protective Eyewear, Face Shields Protective Clothing A surgical mask that covers both the nose and mouth and protective eyewear with solid side shields or a face shield should Protective clothing and equipment (e.g., gowns, lab coats, be worn by DHCP during procedures and patient-care activi- gloves, masks, and protective eyewear or face shield) should be ties likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood or body flu- worn to prevent contamination of street clothing and to pro- ids. Protective eyewear for patients shields their eyes from tect the skin of DHCP from exposures to blood and body spatter or debris generated during dental procedures. A surgi- substances (2,7,10,11,13,137). OSHA bloodborne pathogens cal mask protects against microorganisms generated by the standard requires sleeves to be long enough to protect the fore- wearer, with >95% bacterial filtration efficiency, and also pro- arms when the gown is worn as PPE (i.e., when spatter and tects DHCP from large-particle droplet spatter that might spray of blood, saliva, or OPIM to the forearms is anticipated) contain bloodborne pathogens or other infectious microor- (13,14). DHCP should change protective clothing when it ganisms (173). The mask’s outer surface can become contami- becomes visibly soiled and as soon as feasible if penetrated by nated with infectious droplets from spray of oral fluids or from blood or other potentially infectious fluids (2,13,14,137). All touching the mask with contaminated fingers. Also, when a protective clothing should be removed before leaving the work mask becomes wet from exhaled moist air, the resistance to area (13). airflow through the mask increases, causing more airflow to Gloves and Gloving pass around edges of the mask. If the mask becomes wet, it should be changed between patients or even during patient DHCP wear gloves to prevent contamination of their hands treatment, when possible (2,174). when touching mucous membranes, blood, saliva, or OPIM, When airborne infection isolation precautions (expanded and also to reduce the likelihood that microorganisms present or transmission-based) are necessary (e.g., for TB patients), a on the hands of DHCP will be transmitted to patients during National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health surgical or other patient-care procedures (1,2,7,10). Medical (NIOSH)-certified particulate-filter respirator (e.g., N95, N99, gloves, both patient examination and surgeon’s gloves, are or N100) should be used (20). N95 refers to the ability to manufactured as single-use disposable items that should be filter 1-µm particles in the unloaded state with a filter effi- used for only one patient, then discarded. Gloves should be ciency of >95% (i.e., filter leakage <5%), given flow rates of changed between patients and when torn or punctured. <50 L/min (i.e., approximate maximum airflow rate of HCP Wearing gloves does not eliminate the need for handwashing. during breathing). Available data indicate infectious droplet Hand hygiene should be performed immediately before don- nuclei measure 1–5 µm; therefore, respirators used in health- ning gloves. Gloves can have small, unapparent defects or can care settings should be able to efficiently filter the smallest be torn during use, and hands can become contaminated dur- particles in this range. ing glove removal (122,177–187). These circumstances increase The majority of surgical masks are not NIOSH-certified as the risk of operative wound contamination and exposure of respirators, do not protect the user adequately from exposure the DHCP’s hands to microorganisms from patients. In addi- to TB, and do not satisfy OSHA requirements for respiratory tion, bacteria can multiply rapidly in the moist environments protection (174,175). However, certain surgical masks (i.e., underneath gloves, and thus, the hands should be dried thor- surgical N95 respirator) do meet the requirements and are cer- oughly before donning gloves and washed again immediately tified by NIOSH as respirators. The level of protection a res- after glove removal. pirator provides is determined by the efficiency of the filter 18 MMWR December 19, 2003 Types of Gloves developed defects in 30 minutes–3 hours, depending on type of glove and procedure. Investigators did not determine an Because gloves are task-specific, their selection should be optimal time for changing gloves during procedures. based on the type of procedure to be performed (e.g., surgery During dental procedures, patient examination and surgeon’s or patient examination) (Table 3). Sterile surgeon’s gloves must gloves commonly contact multiple types of chemicals and meet standards for sterility assurance established by FDA and materials (e.g., disinfectants and antiseptics, composite resins, are less likely than patient examination gloves to harbor patho- and bonding agents) that can compromise the integrity of gens that could contaminate an operative wound (188). latex as well as vinyl, nitrile, and other synthetic glove materi- Appropriate gloves in the correct size should be readily acces- als (198–206). In addition, latex gloves can interfere with the sible (13). setting of vinyl polysiloxane impression materials (207–209), Glove Integrity although the setting is apparently not adversely affected by Limited studies of the penetrability of different glove mate- synthetic vinyl gloves (207,208). Given the diverse selection rials under conditions of use have been conducted in the den- of dental materials on the market, dental practitioners should tal environment. Consistent with observations in clinical consult glove manufacturers regarding the chemical compat- medicine, leakage rates vary by glove material (e.g., latex, vinyl, ibility of glove materials. and nitrile), duration of use, and type of procedure performed If the integrity of a glove is compromised (e.g., punctured), (182,184,186,189–191), as well as by manufacturer (192– it should be changed as soon as possible (13,210,211). Wash- 194). The frequency of perforations in surgeon’s gloves used ing latex gloves with plain soap, chlorhexidine, or alcohol can during outpatient oral surgical procedures has been determined lead to the formation of glove micropunctures (177,212,213) to range from 6% to 16% (181,185,195,196). and subsequent hand contamination (138). Because this con- Studies have demonstrated that HCP and DHCP are fre- dition, known as wicking, can allow penetration of liquids quently unaware of minute tears in gloves that occur during through undetected holes, washing gloves is not recommended. use (186,190,191,197). These studies determined that gloves After a hand rub with alcohol, the hands should be thoroughly TABLE 3. Glove types and indications Commercially available glove materials* Glove Indication Comment Material Attributes† Patient Patient care, examinations, Medical device regulated by the Food and Drug Natural-rubber latex (NRL) 1, 2 examination other nonsurgical proce- Administration (FDA). Nitrile 2, 3 gloves§ dures involving contact with Nitrile and chloroprene (neoprene) blends 2, 3 mucous membranes, and Nonsterile and sterile single-use disposable. Use Nitrile & NRL blends 1, 2, 3 laboratory procedures for one patient and discard appropriately. Butadiene methyl methacrylate 2, 3 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC, vinyl) 4 Polyurethane 4 Styrene-based copolymer 4, 5 Surgeon’s Surgical procedures Medical device regulated by the FDA. NRL 1, 2 gloves§ Nitrile 2, 3 Sterile and single-use disposable. Use for one Chloroprene (neoprene) 2, 3 patient and discard appropriately. NRL and nitrile or chloroprene blends 2, 3 Synthetic polyisoprene 2 Styrene-based copolymer 4, 5 Polyurethane 4 Nonmedical Housekeeping procedures Not a medical device regulated by the FDA. NRL and nitrile or chloroprene blends 2, 3 gloves (e.g., cleaning and Chloroprene (neoprene) 2, 3 disinfection) Commonly referred to as utility, industrial, or Nitrile 2, 3 general purpose gloves. Should be puncture- or Butyl rubber 2, 3 Handling contaminated chemical-resistant, depending on the task. Latex Fluoroelastomer 3, 4, 6 sharps or chemicals gloves do not provide adequate chemical Polyethylene and ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer 3, 4, 6 protection. Not for use during patient care Sanitize after use. *Physical properties can vary by material, manufacturer, and protein and chemical composition. † 1contains allergenic NRL proteins. 2vulcanized rubber, contains allergenic rubber processing chemicals. 3likely to have enhanced chemical or puncture resistance. 4nonvulcanized and does not contain rubber processing chemicals. 5inappropriate for use with methacrylates. 6resistant to most methacrylates. § Medical or dental gloves include patient-examination gloves and surgeon’s (i.e., surgical) gloves and are medical devices regulated by the FDA. Only FDA-cleared medical or dental patient-examination gloves and surgical gloves can be used for patient care. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 19 dried before gloving, because hands still wet with an alcohol- Contact Dermatitis and Latex based hand hygiene product can increase the risk of glove per- Hypersensitivity foration (192). Occupationally related contact dermatitis can develop from FDA regulates the medical glove industry, which includes frequent and repeated use of hand hygiene products, exposure gloves marketed as sterile surgeon’s and sterile or nonsterile to chemicals, and glove use. Contact dermatitis is classified as patient examination gloves. General-purpose utility gloves are either irritant or allergic. Irritant contact dermatitis is com- also used in dental health-care settings but are not regulated mon, nonallergic, and develops as dry, itchy, irritated areas on by FDA because they are not promoted for medical use. More the skin around the area of contact. By comparison, allergic rigorous standards are applied to surgeon’s than to examina- contact dermatitis (type IV hypersensitivity) can result from tion gloves. FDA has identified acceptable quality levels (e.g., exposure to accelerators and other chemicals used in the manu- maximum defects allowed) for glove manufacturers (214), but facture of rubber gloves (e.g., natural rubber latex, nitrile, and even intact gloves eventually fail with exposure to mechanical neoprene), as well as from other chemicals found in the dental (e.g., sharps, fingernails, or jewelry) and chemical (e.g., practice setting (e.g., methacrylates and glutaraldehyde). dimethyacrylates) hazards and over time. These variables can Allergic contact dermatitis often manifests as a rash beginning be controlled, ultimately optimizing glove performance, by hours after contact and, similar to irritant dermatitis, is usu- 1) maintaining short fingernails, 2) minimizing or eliminat- ally confined to the area of contact. ing hand jewelry, and 3) using engineering and work-practice Latex allergy (type I hypersensitivity to latex proteins) can controls to avoid injuries with sharps. be a more serious systemic allergic reaction, usually beginning Sterile Surgeon’s Gloves and Double-Gloving within minutes of exposure but sometimes occurring hours During Oral Surgical Procedures later and producing varied symptoms. More common reac- tions include runny nose, sneezing, itchy eyes, scratchy throat, Certain limited studies have determined no difference in hives, and itchy burning skin sensations. More severe symp- postoperative infection rates after routine tooth extractions toms include asthma marked by difficult breathing, coughing when surgeons wore either sterile or nonsterile gloves spells, and wheezing; cardiovascular and gastrointestinal ail- (215,216). However, wearing sterile surgeon’s gloves during ments; and in rare cases, anaphylaxis and death (32,225). The surgical procedures is supported by a strong theoretical ratio- American Dental Association (ADA) began investigating the nale (2,7,137). Sterile gloves minimize transmission of micro- prevalence of type I latex hypersensitivity among DHCP at organisms from the hands of surgical DHCP to patients and the ADA annual meeting in 1994. In 1994 and 1995, prevent contamination of the hands of surgical DHCP with approximately 2,000 dentists, hygienists, and assistants vol- the patient’s blood and body fluids (137). In addition, sterile unteered for skin-prick testing. Data demonstrated that 6.2% surgeon’s gloves are more rigorously regulated by FDA and of those tested were positive for type I latex hypersensitivity therefore might provide an increased level of protection for (226). Data from the subsequent 5 years of this ongoing cross- the provider if exposure to blood is likely. sectional study indicated a decline in prevalence from 8.5% to Although the effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves in 4.3% (227). This downward trend is similar to that reported preventing disease transmission has not been demonstrated, by other studies and might be related to use of latex gloves the majority of studies among HCP and DHCP have demon- with lower allergen content (228–230). strated a lower frequency of inner glove perforation and vis- Natural rubber latex proteins responsible for latex allergy ible blood on the surgeon’s hands when double gloves are worn are attached to glove powder. When powdered latex gloves are (181,185,195,196,198,217–219). In one study evaluating worn, more latex protein reaches the skin. In addition, when double gloves during oral surgical and dental hygiene proce- powdered latex gloves are donned or removed, latex protein/ dures, the perforation of outer latex gloves was greater during powder particles become aerosolized and can be inhaled, con- longer procedures (i.e., >45 minutes), with the highest rate tacting mucous membranes (231). As a result, allergic patients (10%) of perforation occurring during oral surgery procedures and DHCP can experience cutaneous, respiratory, and con- (196). Based on these studies, double gloving might provide junctival symptoms related to latex protein exposure. DHCP additional protection from occupational blood contact (220). can become sensitized to latex protein with repeated exposure Double gloving does not appear to substantially reduce either (232–236). Work areas where only powder-free, low-allergen manual dexterity or tactile sensitivity (221–223). Additional latex gloves are used demonstrate low or undetectable amounts protection might also be provided by specialty products (e.g., of latex allergy-causing proteins (237–239) and fewer symp- orthopedic surgical gloves and glove liners) (224). toms among HCP related to natural rubber latex allergy. 20 MMWR December 19, 2003 Because of the role of glove powder in exposure to latex pro- (cid:127) Have emergency treatment kits with latex-free products tein, NIOSH recommends that if latex gloves are chosen, HCP available at all times. should be provided with reduced protein, powder-free gloves (cid:127) If latex-related complications occur during or after a pro- (32). Nonlatex (e.g., nitrile or vinyl) powder-free and low- cedure, manage the reaction and seek emergency assistance protein gloves are also available (31,240). Although rare, as indicated. Follow current medical emergency response potentially life-threatening anaphylactic reactions to latex can recommendations for management of anaphylaxis (32). occur; dental practices should be appropriately equipped and have procedures in place to respond to such emergencies. Sterilization and Disinfection DHCP and dental patients with latex allergy should not have of Patient-Care Items direct contact with latex-containing materials and should be Patient-care items (dental instruments, devices, and equip- in a latex-safe environment with all latex-containing products ment) are categorized as critical, semicritical, or noncritical, removed from their vicinity (31). Dental patients with histo- depending on the potential risk for infection associated with ries of latex allergy can be at risk from dental products (e.g., their intended use (Table 4) (242). Critical items used to pen- prophylaxis cups, rubber dams, orthodontic elastics, and medi- etrate soft tissue or bone have the greatest risk of transmitting cation vials) (241). Any latex-containing devices that cannot infection and should be sterilized by heat. Semicritical items be removed from the treatment environment should be touch mucous membranes or nonintact skin and have a lower adequately covered or isolated. Persons might also be allergic risk of transmission; because the majority of semicritical items to chemicals used in the manufacture of natural rubber latex in dentistry are heat-tolerant, they also should be sterilized by and synthetic rubber gloves as well as metals, plastics, or other using heat. If a semicritical item is heat-sensitive, it should, at materials used in dental care. Taking thorough health histories a minimum, be processed with high-level disinfection (2). for both patients and DHCP, followed by avoidance of con- Noncritical patient-care items pose the least risk of trans- tact with potential allergens can minimize the possibility of mission of infection, contacting only intact skin, which can adverse reactions. Certain common predisposing conditions serve as an effective barrier to microorganisms. In the majority for latex allergy include previous history of allergies, a history of cases, cleaning, or if visibly soiled, cleaning followed by disin- of spina bifida, urogenital anomalies, or allergies to avocados, fection with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant is adequate. kiwis, nuts, or bananas. The following precautions should be When the item is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM, considered to ensure safe treatment for patients who have pos- an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal sible or documented latex allergy: claim (i.e., intermediate-level disinfectant) should be used (cid:127) Be aware that latent allergens in the ambient air can cause (2,243,244). Cleaning or disinfection of certain noncritical respiratory or anaphylactic symptoms among persons with patient-care items can be difficult or damage the surfaces; there- latex hypersensitivity. Patients with latex allergy can be fore, use of disposable barrier protection of these surfaces might scheduled for the first appointment of the day to mini- be a preferred alternative. mize their inadvertent exposure to airborne latex particles. FDA-cleared sterilant/high-level disinfectants and EPA- (cid:127) Communicate with other DHCP regarding patients with registered disinfectants must have clear label claims for intended latex allergy (e.g., by oral instructions, written protocols, use, and manufacturer instructions for use must be followed and posted signage) to prevent them from bringing latex- (245). A more complete description of the regulatory frame- containing materials into the treatment area. work in the United States by which liquid chemical germi- (cid:127) Frequently clean all working areas contaminated with cides are evaluated and regulated is included (Appendix A). latex powder or dust. TABLE 4. Infection-control categories of patient-care instruments Category Definition Dental instrument or item Critical Penetrates soft tissue, contacts bone, enters into or contacts the blood- Surgical instruments, periodontal scalers, scalpel blades, surgical dental stream or other normally sterile tissue. burs Semicritical Contacts mucous membranes or nonintact skin; will not penetrate soft Dental mouth mirror, amalgam condenser, reusable dental impression tissue, contact bone, enter into or contact the bloodstream or other trays, dental handpieces* normally sterile tissue. Noncritical Contacts intact skin. Radiograph head/cone, blood pressure cuff, facebow, pulse oximeter *Although dental handpieces are considered a semicritical item, they should always be heat-sterilized between uses and not high-level disinfected (246). See Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached to Air or Waterlines for detailed information. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 21 Three levels of disinfection, high, intermediate, and low, are and sterilization processes; it should involve removal of debris used for patient-care devices that do not require sterility and as well as organic and inorganic contamination. Removal of two levels, intermediate and low, for environmental surfaces debris and contamination is achieved either by scrubbing with (242). The intended use of the patient-care item should deter- a surfactant, detergent, and water, or by an automated process mine the recommended level of disinfection. Dental practices (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) using chemical should follow the product manufacturer’s directions regarding agents. If visible debris, whether inorganic or organic matter, is concentrations and exposure time for disinfectant activity rela- not removed, it will interfere with microbial inactivation and tive to the surface to be disinfected (245). A summary of ster- can compromise the disinfection or sterilization process ilization and disinfection methods is included (Appendix C). (244,249–252). After cleaning, instruments should be rinsed with water to remove chemical or detergent residue. Splashing Transporting and Processing Contaminated should be minimized during cleaning and rinsing (13). Before Critical and Semicritical Patient-Care Items final disinfection or sterilization, instruments should be handled DHCP can be exposed to microorganisms on contaminated as though contaminated. instruments and devices through percutaneous injury, contact Considerations in selecting cleaning methods and equipment with nonintact skin on the hands, or contact with mucous include 1) efficacy of the method, process, and equipment; membranes of the eyes, nose, or mouth. Contaminated 2) compatibility with items to be cleaned; and 3) occupational instruments should be handled carefully to prevent exposure health and exposure risks. Use of automated cleaning equip- to sharp instruments that can cause a percutaneous injury. ment (e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) does not Instruments should be placed in an appropriate container at require presoaking or scrubbing of instruments and can the point of use to prevent percutaneous injuries during trans- increase productivity, improve cleaning effectiveness, and port to the instrument processing area (13). decrease worker exposure to blood and body fluids. Thus, Instrument processing requires multiple steps to achieve ster- using automated equipment can be safer and more efficient ilization or high-level disinfection. Sterilization is a complex than manually cleaning contaminated instruments (253). process requiring specialized equipment, adequate space, quali- If manual cleaning is not performed immediately, placing fied DHCP who are provided with ongoing training, and regu- instruments in a puncture-resistant container and soaking them lar monitoring for quality assurance (247). Correct cleaning, with detergent, a disinfectant/detergent, or an enzymatic packaging, sterilizer loading procedures, sterilization methods, cleaner will prevent drying of patient material and make clean- or high-level disinfection methods should be followed to ing easier and less time-consuming. Use of a liquid chemical ensure that an instrument is adequately processed and safe for sterilant/high-level disinfectant (e.g., glutaraldehyde) as a hold- reuse on patients. ing solution is not recommended (244). Using work-practice controls (e.g., long-handled brush) to keep the scrubbing hand Instrument Processing Area away from sharp instruments is recommended (14). To avoid DHCP should process all instruments in a designated cen- injury from sharp instruments, DHCP should wear puncture- tral processing area to more easily control quality and ensure resistant, heavy-duty utility gloves when handling or manu- safety (248). The central processing area should be divided ally cleaning contaminated instruments and devices (6). into sections for 1) receiving, cleaning, and decontamination; Employees should not reach into trays or containers holding 2) preparation and packaging; 3) sterilization; and 4) storage. sharp instruments that cannot be seen (e.g., sinks filled with Ideally, walls or partitions should separate the sections to con- soapy water in which sharp instruments have been placed). trol traffic flow and contain contaminants generated during Work-practice controls should include use of a strainer-type processing. When physical separation of these sections cannot basket to hold instruments and forceps to remove the items. be achieved, adequate spatial separation might be satisfactory Because splashing is likely to occur, a mask, protective eyewear if the DHCP who process instruments are trained in work or face shield, and gown or jacket should be worn (13). practices to prevent contamination of clean areas (248). Space should be adequate for the volume of work anticipated and Preparation and Packaging the items to be stored (248). In another section of the processing area, cleaned instru- ments and other dental supplies should be inspected, assembled Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination into sets or trays, and wrapped, packaged, or placed into con- Reusable instruments, supplies, and equipment should be tainer systems for sterilization. Hinged instruments should be received, sorted, cleaned, and decontaminated in one section processed open and unlocked. An internal chemical indicator of the processing area. Cleaning should precede all disinfection should be placed in every package. In addition, an external 22 MMWR December 19, 2003 chemical indicator (e.g., chemical indicator tape) should be cal or physical parameters of the sterilization process (e.g., time, used when the internal indicator cannot be seen from outside temperature, and pressure). Consult with the sterilizer manu- the package. For unwrapped loads, at a minimum, an internal facturer regarding selection and use of indicators. chemical indicator should be placed in the tray or cassette with Steam Sterilization. Among sterilization methods, steam items to be sterilized (254) (see Sterilization of Unwrapped sterilization, which is dependable and economical, is the most Instruments). Dental practices should refer to the widely used for wrapped and unwrapped critical and manufacturer’s instructions regarding use and correct place- semicritical items that are not sensitive to heat and moisture ment of chemical indicators (see Sterilization Monitoring). (260). Steam sterilization requires exposure of each item to Critical and semicritical instruments that will be stored should direct steam contact at a required temperature and pressure be wrapped or placed in containers (e.g., cassettes or organiz- for a specified time needed to kill microorganisms. Two basic ing trays) designed to maintain sterility during storage types of steam sterilizers are the gravity displacement and the (2,247,255–257). high-speed prevacuum sterilizer. Packaging materials (e.g., wraps or container systems) allow The majority of tabletop sterilizers used in a dental practice penetration of the sterilization agent and maintain sterility of are gravity displacement sterilizers, although prevacuum ster- the processed item after sterilization. Materials for maintain- ilizers are becoming more widely available. In gravity displace- ing sterility of instruments during transport and storage ment sterilizers, steam is admitted through steam lines, a steam include wrapped perforated instrument cassettes, peel pouches generator, or self-generation of steam within the chamber. of plastic or paper, and sterilization wraps (i.e., woven and Unsaturated air is forced out of the chamber through a vent in nonwoven). Packaging materials should be designed for the the chamber wall. Trapping of air is a concern when using type of sterilization process being used (256–259). saturated steam under gravity displacement; errors in packag- ing items or overloading the sterilizer chamber can result in Sterilization cool air pockets and items not being sterilized. The sterilization section of the processing area should Prevacuum sterilizers are fitted with a pump to create a include the sterilizers and related supplies, with adequate space vacuum in the chamber and ensure air removal from the ster- for loading, unloading, and cool down. The area can also ilizing chamber before the chamber is pressurized with steam. include incubators for analyzing spore tests and enclosed stor- Relative to gravity displacement, this procedure allows faster age for sterile items and disposable (single-use) items (260). and more positive steam penetration throughout the entire Manufacturer and local building code specifications will load. Prevacuum sterilizers should be tested periodically for determine placement and room ventilation requirements. adequate air removal, as recommended by the manufacturer. Sterilization Procedures. Heat-tolerant dental instruments Air not removed from the chamber will interfere with steam usually are sterilized by 1) steam under pressure (autoclaving), contact. If a sterilizer fails the air removal test, it should not be 2) dry heat, or 3) unsaturated chemical vapor. All sterilization used until inspected by sterilizer maintenance personnel and should be performed by using medical sterilization equipment it passes the test (243,247). Manufacturer’s instructions, with cleared by FDA. The sterilization times, temperatures, and specific details regarding operation and user maintenance other operating parameters recommended by the manufac- information, should be followed. turer of the equipment used, as well as instructions for correct Unsaturated Chemical-Vapor Sterilization. Unsaturated use of containers, wraps, and chemical or biological indica- chemical-vapor sterilization involves heating a chemical solu- tors, should always be followed (243,247). tion of primarily alcohol with 0.23% formaldehyde in a closed Items to be sterilized should be arranged to permit free cir- pressurized chamber. Unsaturated chemical vapor sterilization culation of the sterilizing agent (e.g., steam, chemical vapor, of carbon steel instruments (e.g., dental burs) causes less cor- or dry heat); manufacturer’s instructions for loading the steril- rosion than steam sterilization because of the low level of izer should be followed (248,260). Instrument packs should water present during the cycle. Instruments should be dry be allowed to dry inside the sterilizer chamber before remov- before sterilizing. State and local authorities should be con- ing and handling. Packs should not be touched until they are sulted for hazardous waste disposal requirements for the steril- cool and dry because hot packs act as wicks, absorbing mois- izing solution. ture, and hence, bacteria from hands (247). The ability of Dry-Heat Sterilization. Dry heat is used to sterilize mate- equipment to attain physical parameters required to achieve rials that might be damaged by moist heat (e.g., burs and cer- sterilization should be monitored by mechanical, chemical, tain orthodontic instruments). Although dry heat has the and biological indicators. Sterilizers vary in their types of advantages of low operating cost and being noncorrosive, it is indicators and their ability to provide readings on the mechani- Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 23 a prolonged process and the high temperatures required are ing the risk of contaminating unwrapped instruments should not suitable for certain patient-care items and devices (261). be prepared and followed (260). Dry-heat sterilizers used in dentistry include static-air and Other Sterilization Methods. Heat-sensitive critical and forced-air types. semicritical instruments and devices can be sterilized by (cid:127) The static-air type is commonly called an oven-type steril- immersing them in liquid chemical germicides registered by izer. Heating coils in the bottom or sides of the unit cause hot FDA as sterilants. When using a liquid chemical germicide for air to rise inside the chamber through natural convection. sterilization, certain poststerilization procedures are essential. (cid:127) The forced-air type is also known as a rapid heat-transfer Items need to be 1) rinsed with sterile water after removal to sterilizer. Heated air is circulated throughout the chamber remove toxic or irritating residues; 2) handled using sterile at a high velocity, permitting more rapid transfer of gloves and dried with sterile towels; and 3) delivered to the energy from the air to the instruments, thereby reducing point of use in an aseptic manner. If stored before use, the the time needed for sterilization. instrument should not be considered sterile and should be ster- Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments. An unwrapped ilized again just before use. In addition, the sterilization pro- cycle (sometimes called flash sterilization) is a method for ster- cess with liquid chemical sterilants cannot be verified with ilizing unwrapped patient-care items for immediate use. The biological indicators (263). time required for unwrapped sterilization cycles depends on Because of these limitations and because liquid chemical ste- the type of sterilizer and the type of item (i.e., porous or non- rilants can require approximately 12 hours of complete porous) to be sterilized (243). The unwrapped cycle in table- immersion, they are almost never used to sterilize instruments. top sterilizers is preprogrammed by the manufacturer to a Rather, these chemicals are more often used for high-level dis- specific time and temperature setting and can include a drying infection (249). Shorter immersion times (12–90 minutes) are phase at the end to produce a dry instrument with much of used to achieve high-level disinfection of semicritical instru- the heat dissipated. If the drying phase requirements are unclear, ments or items. These powerful, sporicidal chemicals (e.g., glu- the operation manual or manufacturer of the sterilizer should taraldehyde, peracetic acid, and hydrogen peroxide) are highly be consulted. If the unwrapped sterilization cycle in a steam toxic (244,264,265). Manufacturer instructions (e.g., regard- sterilizer does not include a drying phase, or has only a mini- ing dilution, immersion time, and temperature) and safety mal drying phase, items retrieved from the sterilizer will be precautions for using chemical sterilants/high-level disinfec- hot and wet, making aseptic transport to the point of use more tants must be followed precisely (15,245). These chemicals difficult. For dry-heat and chemical-vapor sterilizers, a drying should not be used for applications other than those indicated phase is not required. in their label instructions. Misapplications include use as an Unwrapped sterilization should be used only under certain environmental surface disinfectant or instrument-holding conditions: 1) thorough cleaning and drying of instruments solution. precedes the unwrapped sterilization cycle; 2) mechanical When using appropriate precautions (e.g., closed contain- monitors are checked and chemical indicators used for each ers to limit vapor release, chemically resistant gloves and aprons, cycle; 3) care is taken to avoid thermal injury to DHCP or goggles, and face shields), glutaraldehyde-based products can patients; and 4) items are transported aseptically to the point be used without tissue irritation or adverse health effects. How- of use to maintain sterility (134,258,262). Because all implant- ever, dermatologic, eye irritation, respiratory effects, and skin able devices should be quarantined after sterilization until the sensitization have been reported (266–268). Because of their results of biological monitoring are known, unwrapped or flash lack of chemical resistance to glutaraldehydes, medical gloves sterilization of implantable items is not recommended (134). are not an effective barrier (200,269,270). Other factors might Critical instruments sterilized unwrapped should be trans- apply (e.g., room exhaust ventilation or 10 air exchanges/hour) ferred immediately by using aseptic technique, from the steril- to ensure DHCP safety (266,271). For all of these reasons, izer to the actual point of use. Critical instruments should not using heat-sensitive semicritical items that must be processed be stored unwrapped (260). Semicritical instruments that are with liquid chemical germicides is discouraged; heat-tolerant sterilized unwrapped on a tray or in a container system should or disposable alternatives are available for the majority of such be used immediately or within a short time. When sterile items items. are open to the air, they will eventually become contaminated. Low-temperature sterilization with ethylene oxide gas (ETO) Storage, even temporary, of unwrapped semicritical instruments has been used extensively in larger health-care facilities. Its is discouraged because it permits exposure to dust, airborne primary advantage is the ability to sterilize heat- and mois- organisms, and other unnecessary contamination before use ture-sensitive patient-care items with reduced deleterious on a patient (260). A carefully written protocol for minimiz- effects. However, extended sterilization times of 10–48 hours 24 MMWR December 19, 2003 and potential hazards to patients and DHCP requiring strin- Because chemical indicator test results are received when the gent health and safety requirements (272–274) make this sterilization cycle is complete, they can provide an early indi- method impractical for private-practice settings. Handpieces cation of a problem and where in the process the problem cannot be effectively sterilized with this method because of might exist. If either mechanical indicators or internal or decreased penetration of ETO gas flow through a small lumen external chemical indicators indicate inadequate processing, (250,275). Other types of low-temperature sterilization (e.g., items in the load should not be used until reprocessed (134). hydrogen peroxide gas plasma) exist but are not yet practical Biological indicators (BIs) (i.e., spore tests) are the most for dental offices. accepted method for monitoring the sterilization process Bead sterilizers have been used in dentistry to sterilize small (278,279) because they assess it directly by killing known highly metallic instruments (e.g., endodontic files). FDA has deter- resistant microorganisms (e.g., Geobacillus or Bacillus species), mined that a risk of infection exists with these devices because rather than merely testing the physical and chemical condi- of their potential failure to sterilize dental instruments and has tions necessary for sterilization (243). Because spores used in required their commercial distribution cease unless the manu- BIs are more resistant and present in greater numbers than the facturer files a premarket approval application. If a bead steril- common microbial contaminants found on patient-care equip- izer is employed, DHCP assume the risk of employing a ment, an inactivated BI indicates other potential pathogens in dental device FDA has deemed neither safe nor effective (276). the load have been killed (280). Sterilization Monitoring. Monitoring of sterilization pro- Correct functioning of sterilization cycles should be verified cedures should include a combination of process parameters, for each sterilizer by the periodic use (at least weekly) of BIs including mechanical, chemical, and biological (247,248,277). (2,9,134,243,278,279). Every load containing implantable These parameters evaluate both the sterilizing conditions and devices should be monitored with such indicators (248), and the procedure’s effectiveness. the items quarantined until BI results are known. However, in Mechanical techniques for monitoring sterilization include an emergency, placing implantable items in quarantine until assessing cycle time, temperature, and pressure by observing spore tests are known to be negative might be impossible. the gauges or displays on the sterilizer and noting these Manufacturer’s directions should determine the placement parameters for each load (243,248). Some tabletop sterilizers and location of BI in the sterilizer. A control BI, from the have recording devices that print out these parameters. Cor- same lot as the test indicator and not processed through the rect readings do not ensure sterilization, but incorrect read- sterilizer, should be incubated with the test BI; the control BI ings can be the first indication of a problem with the should yield positive results for bacterial growth. sterilization cycle. In-office biological monitoring is available; mail-in steril- Chemical indicators, internal and external, use sensitive ization monitoring services (e.g., from private companies or chemicals to assess physical conditions (e.g., time and tem- dental schools) can also be used to test both the BI and the perature) during the sterilization process. Although chemical control. Although some DHCP have expressed concern that indicators do not prove sterilization has been achieved, they delays caused by mailing specimens might cause false-negatives, allow detection of certain equipment malfunctions, and they studies have determined that mail delays have no substantial can help identify procedural errors. External indicators applied effect on final test results (281,282). to the outside of a package (e.g., chemical indicator tape or Procedures to follow in the event of a positive spore test special markings) change color rapidly when a specific param- have been developed (243,247). If the mechanical (e.g., time, eter is reached, and they verify that the package has been temperature, and pressure) and chemical (i.e., internal or exposed to the sterilization process. Internal chemical indica- external) indicators demonstrate that the sterilizer is function- tors should be used inside each package to ensure the steriliz- ing correctly, a single positive spore test probably does not ing agent has penetrated the packaging material and actually indicate sterilizer malfunction. Items other than implantable reached the instruments inside. A single-parameter internal devices do not necessarily need to be recalled; however the chemical indicator provides information regarding only one spore test should be repeated immediately after correctly load- sterilization parameter (e.g., time or temperature). Multipa- ing the sterilizer and using the same cycle that produced the rameter internal chemical indicators are designed to react to failure. The sterilizer should be removed from service, and all >2 parameters (e.g., time and temperature; or time, tempera- records reviewed of chemical and mechanical monitoring since ture, and the presence of steam) and can provide a more reli- the last negative BI test. Also, sterilizer operating procedures able indication that sterilization conditions have been met should be reviewed, including packaging, loading, and spore (254). Multiparameter internal indicators are available only testing, with all persons who work with the sterilizer to deter- for steam sterilizers (i.e., autoclaves). mine whether operator error could be responsible (9,243,247). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 25 Overloading, failure to provide adequate package separation, Although some health-care facilities continue to date every and incorrect or excessive packaging material are all common sterilized package and use shelf-life practices, other facilities reasons for a positive BI in the absence of mechanical failure have switched to event-related practices (243). This approach of the sterilizer unit (260). A second monitored sterilizer in recognizes that the product should remain sterile indefinitely, the office can be used, or a loaner from a sales or repair com- unless an event causes it to become contaminated (e.g., torn pany obtained, to minimize office disruption while waiting or wet packaging) (284). Even for event-related packaging, for the repeat BI. minimally, the date of sterilization should be placed on the If the repeat test is negative and chemical and mechanical package, and if multiple sterilizers are used in the facility, the monitoring indicate adequate processing, the sterilizer can be sterilizer used should be indicated on the outside of the pack- put back into service. If the repeat BI test is positive, and pack- aging material to facilitate the retrieval of processed items in aging, loading, and operating procedures have been confirmed the event of a sterilization failure (247). If packaging is com- as performing correctly, the sterilizer should remain out of ser- promised, the instruments should be recleaned, packaged in vice until it has been inspected, repaired, and rechallenged with new wrap, and sterilized again. BI tests in three consecutive empty chamber sterilization cycles Clean supplies and instruments should be stored in closed (9,243). When possible, items from suspect loads dating back or covered cabinets, if possible (285). Dental supplies and to the last negative BI should be recalled, rewrapped, and instruments should not be stored under sinks or in other loca- resterilized (9,283). tions where they might become wet. A more conservative approach has been recommended (247) in which any positive spore test is assumed to represent steril- Environmental Infection Control izer malfunction and requires that all materials processed in In the dental operatory, environmental surfaces (i.e., a sur- that sterilizer, dating from the sterilization cycle having the face or equipment that does not contact patients directly) can last negative biologic indicator to the next cycle indicating sat- become contaminated during patient care. Certain surfaces, isfactory biologic indicator results, should be considered especially ones touched frequently (e.g., light handles, unit nonsterile and retrieved, if possible, and reprocessed or held in switches, and drawer knobs) can serve as reservoirs of micro- quarantine until the results of the repeat BI are known. This bial contamination, although they have not been associated approach is considered conservative because the margin of directly with transmission of infection to either DHCP or safety in steam sterilization is sufficient enough that infection patients. Transfer of microorganisms from contaminated risk, associated with items in a load indicating spore growth, is environmental surfaces to patients occurs primarily through minimal, particularly if the item was properly cleaned and the DHCP hand contact (286,287). When these surfaces are temperature was achieved (e.g., as demonstrated by accept- touched, microbial agents can be transferred to instruments, able chemical indicator or temperature chart) (243). Published other environmental surfaces, or to the nose, mouth, or eyes studies are not available that document disease transmission of workers or patients. Although hand hygiene is key to mini- through a nonretrieved surgical instrument after a steam ster- mizing this transferal, barrier protection or cleaning and dis- ilization cycle with a positive biological indicator (243). This infecting of environmental surfaces also protects against more conservative approach should always be used for steril- health-care–associated infections. ization methods other than steam (e.g., dry heat, unsaturated Environmental surfaces can be divided into clinical contact chemical vapor, ETO, or hydrogen peroxide gas plasma) (243). surfaces and housekeeping surfaces (249). Because housekeep- Results of biological monitoring should be recorded and ster- ing surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, and sinks) have limited risk of ilization monitoring records (i.e., mechanical, chemical, and disease transmission, they can be decontaminated with less rig- biological) retained long enough to comply with state and orous methods than those used on dental patient-care items local regulations. Such records are a component of an overall and clinical contact surfaces (244). Strategies for cleaning and dental infection-control program (see Program Evaluation). disinfecting surfaces in patient-care areas should consider the Storage of Sterilized Items and Clean Dental 1) potential for direct patient contact; 2) degree and frequency Supplies of hand contact; and 3) potential contamination of the sur- face with body substances or environmental sources of micro- The storage area should contain enclosed storage for sterile organisms (e.g., soil, dust, or water). items and disposable (single-use) items (173). Storage prac- Cleaning is the necessary first step of any disinfection pro- tices for wrapped sterilized instruments can be either date- or cess. Cleaning is a form of decontamination that renders the event-related. Packages containing sterile supplies should be environmental surface safe by removing organic matter, salts, inspected before use to verify barrier integrity and dryness. 26 MMWR December 19, 2003 and visible soils, all of which interfere with microbial inactiva- if surfaces have become contaminated since their last cleaning tion. The physical action of scrubbing with detergents and (13). To facilitate daily cleaning, treatment areas should be surfactants and rinsing with water removes substantial num- kept free of unnecessary equipment and supplies. bers of microorganisms. If a surface is not cleaned first, the Manufacturers of dental devices and equipment should pro- success of the disinfection process can be compromised. vide information regarding material compatibility with liquid Removal of all visible blood and inorganic and organic matter chemical germicides, whether equipment can be safely can be as critical as the germicidal activity of the disinfecting immersed for cleaning, and how it should be decontaminated agent (249). When a surface cannot be cleaned adequately, it if servicing is required (289). Because of the risks associated should be protected with barriers (2). with exposure to chemical disinfectants and contaminated sur- faces, DHCP who perform environmental cleaning and disin- Clinical Contact Surfaces fection should wear gloves and other PPE to prevent Clinical contact surfaces can be directly contaminated from occupational exposure to infectious agents and hazardous patient materials either by direct spray or spatter generated chemicals. Chemical- and puncture-resistant utility gloves during dental procedures or by contact with DHCP’s gloved offer more protection than patient examination gloves when hands. These surfaces can subsequently contaminate other using hazardous chemicals. instruments, devices, hands, or gloves. Examples of such sur- Housekeeping Surfaces faces include (cid:127) light handles, Evidence does not support that housekeeping surfaces (e.g., (cid:127) switches, floors, walls, and sinks) pose a risk for disease transmission in (cid:127) dental radiograph equipment, dental health-care settings. Actual, physical removal of micro- (cid:127) dental chairside computers, organisms and soil by wiping or scrubbing is probably as criti- (cid:127) reusable containers of dental materials, cal, if not more so, than any antimicrobial effect provided by (cid:127) drawer handles, the agent used (244,290). The majority of housekeeping sur- (cid:127) faucet handles, faces need to be cleaned only with a detergent and water or an (cid:127) countertops, EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/detergent, depending on (cid:127) pens, the nature of the surface and the type and degree of contami- (cid:127) telephones, and nation. Schedules and methods vary according to the area (e.g., (cid:127) doorknobs. dental operatory, laboratory, bathrooms, or reception rooms), Barrier protection of surfaces and equipment can prevent surface, and amount and type of contamination. contamination of clinical contact surfaces, but is particularly Floors should be cleaned regularly, and spills should be effective for those that are difficult to clean. Barriers include cleaned up promptly. An EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/ clear plastic wrap, bags, sheets, tubing, and plastic-backed detergent designed for general housekeeping purposes should paper or other materials impervious to moisture (260,288). be used in patient-care areas if uncertainty exists regarding the Because such coverings can become contaminated, they should nature of the soil on the surface (e.g., blood or body fluid be removed and discarded between patients, while DHCP are contamination versus routine dust or dirt). Unless contami- still gloved. After removing the barrier, examine the surface to nation is reasonably anticipated or apparent, cleaning or dis- make sure it did not become soiled inadvertently. The surface infecting walls, window drapes, and other vertical surfaces is needs to be cleaned and disinfected only if contamination is unnecessary. However, when housekeeping surfaces are visibly evident. Otherwise, after removing gloves and performing hand contaminated by blood or OPIM, prompt removal and sur- hygiene, DHCP should place clean barriers on these surfaces face disinfection is appropriate infection-control practice and before the next patient (1,2,288). required by OSHA (13). If barriers are not used, surfaces should be cleaned and dis- Part of the cleaning strategy is to minimize contamination infected between patients by using an EPA-registered hospital of cleaning solutions and cleaning tools (e.g., mop heads or disinfectant with an HIV, HBV claim (i.e., low-level disinfec- cleaning cloths). Mops and cloths should be cleaned after use tant) or a tuberculocidal claim (i.e., intermediate-level disin- and allowed to dry before reuse, or single-use, disposable mop fectant). Intermediate-level disinfectant should be used when heads and cloths should be used to avoid spreading contami- the surface is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM nation. Cost, safety, product-surface compatibility, and accept- (2,244). Also, general cleaning and disinfection are recom- ability by housekeepers can be key criteria for selecting a mended for clinical contact surfaces, dental unit surfaces, and cleaning agent or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant/ countertops at the end of daily work activities and are required Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 27 detergent. PPE used during cleaning and housekeeping proce- aged (e.g., dental operatory, laboratory, or instrument process- dures followed should be appropriate to the task. ing areas). For these reasons, use of carpeted flooring and fab- In the cleaning process, another reservoir for microorgan- ric-upholstered furnishings in these areas should be avoided. isms can be dilute solutions of detergents or disinfectants, Nonregulated and Regulated Medical Waste especially if prepared in dirty containers, stored for long peri- ods of time, or prepared incorrectly (244). Manufacturers’ Studies have compared microbial load and diversity of instructions for preparation and use should be followed. Mak- microorganisms in residential waste with waste from multiple ing fresh cleaning solution each day, discarding any remaining health-care settings. General waste from hospitals or other solution, and allowing the container to dry will minimize bac- health-care facilities (e.g., dental practices or clinical/research terial contamination. Preferred cleaning methods produce laboratories) is no more infective than residential waste minimal mists and aerosols or dispersion of dust in patient- (296,297). The majority of soiled items in dental offices are care areas. general medical waste and thus can be disposed of with ordi- nary waste. Examples include used gloves, masks, gowns, lightly Cleaning and Disinfection Strategies soiled gauze or cotton rolls, and environmental barriers (e.g., for Blood Spills plastic sheets or bags) used to cover equipment during treat- The majority of blood contamination events in dentistry ment (298). result from spatter during dental procedures using rotary or Although any item that has had contact with blood, exu- ultrasonic instrumentation. Although no evidence supports dates, or secretions might be infective, treating all such waste that HBV, HCV, or HIV have been transmitted from a house- as infective is neither necessary nor practical (244). Infectious keeping surface, prompt removal and surface disinfection of waste that carries a substantial risk of causing infection during an area contaminated by either blood or OPIM are appropri- handling and disposal is regulated medical waste. A complete ate infection-control practices and required by OSHA (13,291). definition of regulated waste is included in OSHA’s bloodborne Strategies for decontaminating spills of blood and other body pathogens standard (13). fluids differ by setting and volume of the spill (113,244). Blood Regulated medical waste is only a limited subset of waste: spills on either clinical contact or housekeeping surfaces should 9%–15% of total waste in hospitals and 1%–2% of total waste be contained and managed as quickly as possible to reduce the in dental offices (298,299). Regulated medical waste requires risk of contact by patients and DHCP (244,292). The person special storage, handling, neutralization, and disposal and is assigned to clean the spill should wear gloves and other PPE as covered by federal, state, and local rules and regulations needed. Visible organic material should be removed with (6,297,300,301). Examples of regulated waste found in den- absorbent material (e.g., disposable paper towels discarded in tal-practice settings are solid waste soaked or saturated with a leak-proof, appropriately labeled container). Nonporous sur- blood or saliva (e.g., gauze saturated with blood after surgery), faces should be cleaned and then decontaminated with either extracted teeth, surgically removed hard and soft tissues, and an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant effective against HBV contaminated sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel blades, and and HIV or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a wires) (13). tuberculocidal claim (i.e., intermediate-level disinfectant). If Regulated medical waste requires careful containment for sodium hypochlorite is chosen, an EPA-registered sodium treatment or disposal. A single leak-resistant biohazard bag is hypochlorite product is preferred. However, if such products usually adequate for containment of nonsharp regulated medi- are unavailable, a 1:100 dilution of sodium hypochlorite (e.g., cal waste, provided the bag is sturdy and the waste can be approximately ¼ cup of 5.25% household chlorine bleach to discarded without contaminating the bag’s exterior. Exterior 1 gallon of water) is an inexpensive and effective disinfecting contamination or puncturing of the bag requires placement in agent (113). a second biohazard bag. All bags should be securely closed for disposal. Puncture-resistant containers with a biohazard label, Carpeting and Cloth Furnishings located at the point of use (i.e., sharps containers), are used as Carpeting is more difficult to clean than nonporous hard- containment for scalpel blades, needles, syringes, and unused surface flooring, and it cannot be reliably disinfected, espe- sterile sharps (13). cially after spills of blood and body substances. Studies have Dental health-care facilities should dispose of medical waste documented the presence of diverse microbial populations, regularly to avoid accumulation. Any facility generating regu- primarily bacteria and fungi, in carpeting (293–295). Cloth lated medical waste should have a plan for its management furnishings pose similar contamination risks in areas of direct that complies with federal, state, and local regulations to patient care and places where contaminated materials are man- ensure health and environmental safety. 28 MMWR December 19, 2003 Discharging Blood or Other Body Fluids sols (324). Health-care–associated transmission of pathogenic to Sanitary Sewers or Septic Tanks agents (e.g., Legionella species) occurs primarily through inha- lation of infectious aerosols generated from potable water All containers with blood or saliva (e.g., suctioned fluids) sources or through use of tap water in respiratory therapy equip- can be inactivated in accordance with state-approved treat- ment (325–327). Disease outbreaks in the community have ment technologies, or the contents can be carefully poured also been reported from diverse environmental aerosol- down a utility sink, drain, or toilet (6). Appropriate PPE (e.g., producing sources, including whirlpool spas (328), swimming gloves, gown, mask, and protective eyewear) should be worn pools (329), and a grocery store mist machine (330). Although when performing this task (13). No evidence exists that the majority of these outbreaks are associated with species of bloodborne diseases have been transmitted from contact with Legionella and Pseudomonas (329), the fungus Cladosporium raw or treated sewage. Multiple bloodborne pathogens, par- (331) has also been implicated. ticularly viruses, are not stable in the environment for long Researchers have not demonstrated a measurable risk of periods (302), and the discharge of limited quantities of blood adverse health effects among DHCP or patients from expo- and other body fluids into the sanitary sewer is considered a sure to dental water. Certain studies determined DHCP had safe method for disposing of these waste materials (6). State altered nasal flora (332) or substantially greater titers of and local regulations vary and dictate whether blood or other Legionella antibodies in comparisons with control populations; body fluids require pretreatment or if they can be discharged however, no cases of legionellosis were identified among into the sanitary sewer and in what volume. exposed DHCP (333,334). Contaminated dental water might have been the source for localized Pseudomonas aeruginosa Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, infections in two immunocompromised patients (312). and Water Quality Although transient carriage of P. aeruginosa was observed in Studies have demonstrated that dental unit waterlines (i.e., 78 healthy patients treated with contaminated dental treat- narrow-bore plastic tubing that carries water to the high-speed ment water, no illness was reported among the group. In this handpiece, air/water syringe, and ultrasonic scaler) can become same study, a retrospective review of dental records also failed colonized with microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and to identify infections (312). protozoa (303–309). Protected by a polysaccharide slime layer Concentrations of bacterial endotoxin <1,000 endotoxin known as a glycocalyx, these microorganisms colonize and rep- units/mL from gram-negative water bacteria have been detected licate on the interior surfaces of the waterline tubing and form in water from colonized dental units (335). No standards exist a biofilm, which serves as a reservoir that can amplify the num- for an acceptable level of endotoxin in drinking water, but the ber of free-floating (i.e., planktonic) microorganisms in water maximum level permissible in United States Pharmacopeia used for dental treatment. Although oral flora (303,310,311) (USP) sterile water for irrigation is only 0.25 endotoxin units/ and human pathogens (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa mL (336). Although the consequences of acute and chronic [303,305,312,313], Legionella species [303,306,313], and exposure to aerosolized endotoxin in dental health-care set- nontuberculous Mycobacterium species [303,304]), have been tings have not been investigated, endotoxin has been associ- isolated from dental water systems, the majority of organisms ated with exacerbation of asthma and onset of hypersensitivity recovered from dental waterlines are common heterotrophic pneumonitis in other occupational settings (329,337). water bacteria (305,314,315). These exhibit limited patho- Dental Unit Water Quality genic potential for immunocompetent persons. Research has demonstrated that microbial counts can reach Clinical Implications <200,000 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL within 5 days Certain reports associate waterborne infections with dental after installation of new dental unit waterlines (305), and lev- water systems, and scientific evidence verifies the potential for els of microbial contamination <106 CFU/mL of dental unit transmission of waterborne infections and disease in hospital water have been documented (309,338). These counts can settings and in the community (306,312,316). Infection or occur because dental unit waterline factors (e.g., system design, colonization caused by Pseudomonas species or nontuberculous flow rates, and materials) promote both bacterial growth and mycobacteria can occur among susceptible patients through development of biofilm. direct contact with water (317–320) or after exposure to Although no epidemiologic evidence indicates a public health residual waterborne contamination of inadequately reprocessed problem, the presence of substantial numbers of pathogens in medical instruments (321–323). Nontuberculous mycobac- dental unit waterlines generates concern. Exposing patients or teria can also be transmitted to patients from tap water aero- DHCP to water of uncertain microbiological quality, despite Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 29 the lack of documented adverse health effects, is inconsistent the turbine, air, or waterlines. The majority of recently manu- with accepted infection-control principles. Thus in 1995, ADA factured dental units are engineered to prevent retraction of addressed the dental water concern by asking manufacturers oral fluids, but some older dental units are equipped with to provide equipment with the ability to deliver treatment water antiretraction valves that require periodic maintenance. Users with <200 CFU/mL of unfiltered output from waterlines (339). should consult the owner’s manual or contact the manufac- This threshold was based on the quality assurance standard turer to determine whether testing or maintenance of established for dialysate fluid, to ensure that fluid delivery sys- antiretraction valves or other devices is required. Even with tems in hemodialysis units have not been colonized by indig- antiretraction valves, flushing devices for a minimum of 20– enous waterborne organisms (340). 30 seconds after each patient is recommended. Standards also exist for safe drinking water quality as estab- Maintenance and Monitoring lished by EPA, the American Public Health Association of Dental Unit Water (APHA), and the American Water Works Association (AWWA); they have set limits for heterotrophic bacteria of DHCP should be trained regarding water quality, biofilm <500 CFU/mL of drinking water (341,342). Thus, the num- formation, water treatment methods, and appropriate main- ber of bacteria in water used as a coolant/irrigant for nonsur- tenance protocols for water delivery systems. Water treatment gical dental procedures should be as low as reasonably and monitoring products require strict adherence to mainte- achievable and, at a minimum, <500 CFU/mL, the regulatory nance protocols, and noncompliance with treatment regimens standard for safe drinking water established by EPA and APHA/ has been associated with persistence of microbial contamina- AWWA. tion in treated systems (345). Clinical monitoring of water quality can ensure that procedures are correctly performed and Strategies To Improve Dental that devices are working in accordance with the manufacturer’s Unit Water Quality previously validated protocol. In 1993, CDC recommended that dental waterlines be Dentists should consult with the manufacturer of their dental flushed at the beginning of the clinic day to reduce the micro- unit or water delivery system to determine the best method for bial load (2). However, studies have demonstrated this prac- maintaining acceptable water quality (i.e., <500 CFU/mL) and tice does not affect biofilm in the waterlines or reliably improve the recommended frequency of monitoring. Monitoring of den- the quality of water used during dental treatment tal water quality can be performed by using commercial self- (315,338,343). Because the recommended value of <500 CFU/ contained test kits or commercial water-testing laboratories. mL cannot be achieved by using this method, other strategies Because methods used to treat dental water systems target the should be employed. Dental unit water that remains untreated entire biofilm, no rationale exists for routine testing for such or unfiltered is unlikely to meet drinking water standards (303– specific organisms as Legionella or Pseudomonas, except when 309). Commercial devices and procedures designed to improve investigating a suspected waterborne disease outbreak (244). the quality of water used in dental treatment are available (316); Delivery of Sterile Surgical Irrigation methods demonstrated to be effective include self-contained water systems combined with chemical treatment, in-line Sterile solutions (e.g., sterile saline or sterile water) should be microfilters, and combinations of these treatments. Simply used as a coolant/irrigation in the performance of oral surgical using source water containing <500 CFU/mL of bacteria (e.g., procedures where a greater opportunity exists for entry of tap, distilled, or sterile water) in a self-contained water system microorganisms, exogenous and endogenous, into the vascular will not eliminate bacterial contamination in treatment water system and other normally sterile areas that support the oral if biofilms in the water system are not controlled. Removal or cavity (e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue) and increased poten- inactivation of dental waterline biofilms requires use of chemi- tial exists for localized or systemic infection (see Oral Surgical cal germicides. Procedures). Conventional dental units cannot reliably deliver Patient material (e.g., oral microorganisms, blood, and saliva) sterile water even when equipped with independent water res- can enter the dental water system during patient treatment ervoirs because the water-bearing pathway cannot be reliably (311,344). Dental devices that are connected to the dental sterilized. Delivery devices (e.g., bulb syringe or sterile, single- water system and that enter the patient’s mouth (e.g., use disposable products) should be used to deliver sterile water handpieces, ultrasonic scalers, or air/water syringes) should be (2,121). Oral surgery and implant handpieces, as well as ultra- operated to discharge water and air for a minimum of 20–30 sonic scalers, are commercially available that bypass the dental seconds after each patient (2). This procedure is intended to unit to deliver sterile water or other solutions by using single- physically flush out patient material that might have entered use disposable or sterilizable tubing (316). 30 MMWR December 19, 2003 Boil-Water Advisories Special Considerations A boil-water advisory is a public health announcement that Dental Handpieces and Other Devices the public should boil tap water before drinking it. When Attached to Air and Waterlines issued, the public should assume the water is unsafe to drink. Advisories can be issued after 1) failure of or substantial inter- Multiple semicritical dental devices that touch mucous mem- ruption in water treatment processes that result in increased branes are attached to the air or waterlines of the dental unit. turbidity levels or particle counts and mechanical or equip- Among these devices are high- and low-speed handpieces, pro- ment failure; 2) positive test results for pathogens (e.g., phylaxis angles, ultrasonic and sonic scaling tips, air abrasion Cryptosporidium, Giardia, or Shigella) in water; 3) violations devices, and air and water syringe tips. Although no epide- of the total coliform rule or the turbidity standard of the sur- miologic evidence implicates these instruments in disease trans- face water treatment rule; 4) circumstances that compromise mission (353), studies of high-speed handpieces using dye the distribution system (e.g., watermain break) coupled with expulsion have confirmed the potential for retracting oral flu- an indication of a health hazard; or 5) a natural disaster (e.g., ids into internal compartments of the device (354–358). This flood, hurricane, or earthquake) (346). In recent years, determination indicates that retained patient material can be increased numbers of boil-water advisories have resulted from expelled intraorally during subsequent uses. Studies using labo- contamination of public drinking water systems with water- ratory models also indicate the possibility for retention of viral borne pathogens. Most notable was the outbreak of DNA and viable virus inside both high-speed handpieces and cryptosporidiosis in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where the prophylaxis angles (356,357,359). The potential for contami- municipal water system was contaminated with the protozoan nation of the internal surfaces of other devices (e.g., low-speed parasite Cryptosporidium parvum. An estimated 403,000 per- handpieces and ultrasonic scalers), has not been studied, but sons became ill (347,348). restricted physical access limits their cleaning. Accordingly, any During a boil-water advisory, water should not be delivered dental device connected to the dental air/water system that to patients through the dental unit, ultrasonic scaler, or other enters the patient’s mouth should be run to discharge water, dental equipment that uses the public water system. This air, or a combination for a minimum of 20–30 seconds after restriction does not apply if the water source is isolated from each patient (2). This procedure is intended to help physically the municipal water system (e.g., a separate water reservoir or flush out patient material that might have entered the turbine other water treatment device cleared for marketing by FDA). and air and waterlines (2,356,357). Patients should rinse with bottled or distilled water until the Heat methods can sterilize dental handpieces and other in- boil-water advisory has been cancelled. During these advisory traoral devices attached to air or waterlines (246,275,356, periods, tap water should not be used to dilute germicides or 357,360). For processing any dental device that can be for hand hygiene unless the water has been brought to a roll- removed from the dental unit air or waterlines, neither surface ing boil for >1 minute and cooled before use (346,349–351). disinfection nor immersion in chemical germicides is an For hand hygiene, antimicrobial products that do not require acceptable method. Ethylene oxide gas cannot adequately ster- water (e.g., alcohol-based hand rubs) can be used until the ilize internal components of handpieces (250,275). In clinical boil-water notice is cancelled. If hands are visibly contami- evaluations of high-speed handpieces, cleaning and lubrica- nated, bottled water and soap should be used for handwashing; tion were the most critical factors in determining performance if bottled water is not immediately available, an antiseptic and durability (361–363). Manufacturer’s instructions for towelette should be used (13,122). cleaning, lubrication, and sterilization should be followed When the advisory is cancelled, the local water utility should closely to ensure both the effectiveness of the process and the provide guidance for flushing of waterlines to reduce residual longevity of handpieces. microbial contamination. All incoming waterlines from the Some components of dental instruments are permanently public water system inside the dental office (e.g., faucets, water- attached to dental unit waterlines and although they do not lines, and dental equipment) should be flushed. No consensus enter the patient’s oral cavity, they are likely to become con- exists regarding the optimal duration for flushing procedures taminated with oral fluids during treatment procedures. Such after cancellation of the advisory; recommendations range from components (e.g., handles or dental unit attachments of saliva 1 to 5 minutes (244,346,351,352). The length of time needed ejectors, high-speed air evacuators, and air/water syringes) can vary with the type and length of the plumbing system lead- should be covered with impervious barriers that are changed ing to the office. After the incoming public water system lines after each use. If the item becomes visibly contaminated dur- are flushed, dental unit waterlines should be disinfected accord- ing use, DHCP should clean and disinfect with an EPA- ing to the manufacturer’s instructions (346). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 31 registered hospital disinfectant (intermediate-level) before use become contaminated should be cleaned and disinfected with on the next patient. an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant of low- (i.e., HIV and HBV claim) to intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) Saliva Ejectors activity. Radiography equipment (e.g., radiograph tubehead and control panel) should be protected with surface barriers Backflow from low-volume saliva ejectors occurs when the that are changed after each patient. If barriers are not used, pressure in the patient’s mouth is less than that in the evacua- equipment that has come into contact with DHCP’s gloved tor. Studies have reported that backflow in low-volume suc- hands or contaminated film packets should be cleaned and tion lines can occur and microorganisms be present in the lines then disinfected after each patient use. retracted into the patient’s mouth when a seal around the Digital radiography sensors and other high-technology saliva ejector is created (e.g., by a patient closing lips around instruments (e.g., intraoral camera, electronic periodontal the tip of the ejector, creating a partial vacuum) (364–366). probe, occlusal analyzers, and lasers) come into contact with This backflow can be a potential source of cross-contamina- mucous membranes and are considered semicritical devices. tion; occurrence is variable because the quality of the seal They should be cleaned and ideally heat-sterilized or high- formed varies between patients. Furthermore, studies have dem- level disinfected between patients. However, these items vary onstrated that gravity pulls fluid back toward the patient’s by manufacturer or type of device in their ability to be steril- mouth whenever a length of the suction tubing holding the ized or high-level disinfected. Semicritical items that cannot tip is positioned above the patient’s mouth, or during simulta- be reprocessed by heat sterilization or high-level disinfection neous use of other evacuation (high-volume) equipment (364– should, at a minimum, be barrier protected by using an FDA- 366). Although no adverse health effects associated with the cleared barrier to reduce gross contamination during use. Use saliva ejector have been reported, practitioners should be aware of a barrier does not always protect from contamination (369– that in certain situations, backflow could occur when using a 374). One study determined that a brand of commercially saliva ejector. available plastic barriers used to protect dental digital radiog- raphy sensors failed at a substantial rate (44%). This rate Dental Radiology dropped to 6% when latex finger cots were used in conjunc- When taking radiographs, the potential to cross-contami- tion with the plastic barrier (375). To minimize the potential nate equipment and environmental surfaces with blood or for device-associated infections, after removing the barrier, the saliva is high if aseptic technique is not practiced. Gloves should device should be cleaned and disinfected with an EPA- be worn when taking radiographs and handling contaminated registered hospital disinfectant (intermediate-level) after each film packets. Other PPE (e.g., mask, protective eyewear, and patient. Manufacturers should be consulted regarding appro- gowns) should be used if spattering of blood or other body priate barrier and disinfection/sterilization procedures for digi- fluids is likely (11,13,367). Heat-tolerant versions of intraoral tal radiography sensors, other high-technology intraoral devices, radiograph accessories are available and these semicritical items and computer components. (e.g., film-holding and positioning devices) should be heat- sterilized before patient use. Aseptic Technique for Parenteral After exposure of the radiograph and before glove removal, Medications the film should be dried with disposable gauze or a paper towel Safe handling of parenteral medications and fluid infusion to remove blood or excess saliva and placed in a container (e.g., systems is required to prevent health-care–associated infections disposable cup) for transport to the developing area. Alterna- among patients undergoing conscious sedation. Parenteral tively, if FDA-cleared film barrier pouches are used, the film medications can be packaged in single-dose ampules, vials or packets should be carefully removed from the pouch to avoid prefilled syringes, usually without bacteriostatic/preservative contamination of the outside film packet and placed in the agents, and intended for use on a single patient. Multidose clean container for transport to the developing area. vials, used for more than one patient, can have a preservative, Various methods have been recommended for aseptic trans- but both types of containers of medication should be handled port of exposed films to the developing area, and for removing with aseptic techniques to prevent contamination. the outer film packet before exposing and developing the film. Single-dose vials should be used for parenteral medications Other information regarding dental radiography infection whenever possible (376,377). Single-dose vials might pose a control is available (260,367,368). However, care should be risk for contamination if they are punctured repeatedly. The taken to avoid contamination of the developing equipment. leftover contents of a single-dose vial should be discarded and Protective barriers should be used, or any surfaces that 32 MMWR December 19, 2003 never combined with medications for use on another patient Preprocedural Mouth Rinses (376,377). Medication from a single-dose syringe should not Antimicrobial mouth rinses used by patients before a dental be administered to multiple patients, even if the needle on the procedure are intended to reduce the number of microorgan- syringe is changed (378). isms the patient might release in the form of aerosols or spat- The overall risk for extrinsic contamination of multidose ter that subsequently can contaminate DHCP and equipment vials is probably minimal, although the consequences of con- operatory surfaces. In addition, preprocedural rinsing can tamination might result in life-threatening infection (379). If decrease the number of microorganisms introduced in the necessary to use a multidose vial, its access diaphragm should patient’s bloodstream during invasive dental procedures be cleansed with 70% alcohol before inserting a sterile device (389,390). into the vial (380,381). A multidose vial should be discarded No scientific evidence indicates that preprocedural mouth if sterility is compromised (380,381). rinsing prevents clinical infections among DHCP or patients, Medication vials, syringes, or supplies should not be carried but studies have demonstrated that a preprocedural rinse with in uniform or clothing pockets. If trays are used to deliver an antimicrobial product (e.g., chlorhexidine gluconate, medications to individual patients, they should be cleaned essential oils, or povidone-iodine) can reduce the level of oral between patients. To further reduce the chance of contamina- microorganisms in aerosols and spatter generated during rou- tion, all medication vials should be restricted to a centralized tine dental procedures with rotary instruments (e.g., dental medication preparation area separate from the treatment area handpieces or ultrasonic scalers) (391–399). Preprocedural (382). mouth rinses can be most beneficial before a procedure that All fluid infusion and administration sets (e.g., IV bags, tub- requires using a prophylaxis cup or ultrasonic scaler because ing, and connections) are single-patient use because sterility rubber dams cannot be used to minimize aerosol and spatter cannot be guaranteed when an infusion or administration set generation and, unless the provider has an assistant, high- is used on multiple patients. Aseptic technique should be used volume evacuation is not commonly used (173). when preparing IV infusion and administration sets, and The science is unclear concerning the incidence and nature entry into or breaks in the tubing should be minimized (378). of bacteremias from oral procedures, the relationship of these bacteremias to disease, and the preventive benefit of antimi- Single-Use or Disposable Devices crobial rinses. In limited studies, no substantial benefit has A single-use device, also called a disposable device, is been demonstrated for mouth rinsing in terms of reducing designed to be used on one patient and then discarded, not oral microorganisms in dental-induced bacteremias (400,401). reprocessed for use on another patient (e.g., cleaned, disin- However, the American Heart Association’s recommendations fected, or sterilized) (383). Single-use devices in dentistry are regarding preventing bacterial endocarditis during dental pro- usually not heat-tolerant and cannot be reliably cleaned. cedures (402) provide limited support concerning Examples include syringe needles, prophylaxis cups and preprocedural mouth rinsing with an antimicrobial as an brushes, and plastic orthodontic brackets. Certain items (e.g., adjunct for patients at risk for bacterial endocarditis. Insuffi- prophylaxis angles, saliva ejectors, high-volume evacuator tips, cient data exist to recommend preprocedural mouth rinses to and air/water syringe tips) are commonly available in a dispos- prevent clinical infections among patients or DHCP. able form and should be disposed of appropriately after each use. Single-use devices and items (e.g., cotton rolls, gauze, and Oral Surgical Procedures irrigating syringes) for use during oral surgical procedures The oral cavity is colonized with numerous microorganisms. should be sterile at the time of use. Oral surgical procedures present an opportunity for entry of Because of the physical construction of certain devices (e.g., microorganisms (i.e., exogenous and endogenous) into the burs, endodontic files, and broaches) cleaning can be difficult. vascular system and other normally sterile areas of the oral In addition, deterioration can occur on the cutting surfaces of cavity (e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue); therefore, an some carbide/diamond burs and endodontic files during pro- increased potential exists for localized or systemic infection. cessing (384) and after repeated processing cycles, leading to Oral surgical procedures involve the incision, excision, or potential breakage during patient treatment (385–388). These reflection of tissue that exposes the normally sterile areas of factors, coupled with the knowledge that burs and endodon- the oral cavity. Examples include biopsy, periodontal surgery, tic instruments exhibit signs of wear during normal use, might apical surgery, implant surgery, and surgical extractions of teeth make it practical to consider them as single-use devices. (e.g., removal of erupted or nonerupted tooth requiring eleva- tion of mucoperiosteal flap, removal of bone or section of tooth, Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 33 and suturing if needed) (see Hand Hygiene, PPE, Single Use but because preclinical educational exercises simulate clinical or Disposable Devices, and Dental Unit Water Quality). experiences, students enrolled in dental programs should still follow standard precautions. Autoclaving teeth for preclinical Handling of Biopsy Specimens laboratory exercises does not appear to alter their physical prop- erties sufficiently to compromise the learning experience To protect persons handling and transporting biopsy speci- (405,406). However, whether autoclave sterilization of mens, each specimen must be placed in a sturdy, leakproof extracted teeth affects dentinal structure to the point that the container with a secure lid for transportation (13). Care should chemical and microchemical relationship between dental be taken when collecting the specimen to avoid contaminat- materials and the dentin would be affected for research pur- ing the outside of the container. If the outside of the container poses on dental materials is unknown (406). becomes visibly contaminated, it should be cleaned and disin- Use of teeth that do not contain amalgam is preferred in fected or placed in an impervious bag (2,13). The container educational settings because they can be safely autoclaved must be labeled with the biohazard symbol during storage, (403,405). Extracted teeth containing amalgam restorations transport, shipment, and disposal (13,14). should not be heat-sterilized because of the potential health hazard from mercury vaporization and exposure. If extracted Handling of Extracted Teeth teeth containing amalgam restorations are to be used, immer- sion in 10% formalin solution for 2 weeks should be effective Disposal in disinfecting both the internal and external structures of the Extracted teeth that are being discarded are subject to the teeth (403). If using formalin, manufacturer MSDS should be containerization and labeling provisions outlined by OSHA’s reviewed for occupational safety and health concerns and to bloodborne pathogens standard (13). OSHA considers ensure compliance with OSHA regulations (15). extracted teeth to be potentially infectious material that should be disposed in medical waste containers. Extracted teeth sent Dental Laboratory to a dental laboratory for shade or size comparisons should be cleaned, surface-disinfected with an EPA-registered hospital Dental prostheses, appliances, and items used in their fabri- disinfectant with intermediate-level activity (i.e., tuberculocidal cation (e.g., impressions, occlusal rims, and bite registrations) claim), and transported in a manner consistent with OSHA are potential sources for cross-contamination and should be regulations. However, extracted teeth can be returned to handled in a manner that prevents exposure of DHCP, patients, patients on request, at which time provisions of the standard or the office environment to infectious agents. Effective com- no longer apply (14). Extracted teeth containing dental amal- munication and coordination between the laboratory and den- gam should not be placed in a medical waste container that tal practice will ensure that appropriate cleaning and uses incineration for final disposal. Commercial metal- disinfection procedures are performed in the dental office or recycling companies also might accept extracted teeth with laboratory, materials are not damaged or distorted because of metal restorations, including amalgam. State and local regula- disinfectant overexposure, and effective disinfection procedures tions should be consulted regarding disposal of the amalgam. are not unnecessarily duplicated (407,408). When a laboratory case is sent off-site, DHCP should pro- Educational Settings vide written information regarding the methods (e.g., type of Extracted teeth are occasionally collected for use in preclini- disinfectant and exposure time) used to clean and disinfect cal educational training. These teeth should be cleaned of vis- the material (e.g., impression, stone model, or appliance) ible blood and gross debris and maintained in a hydrated state (2,407,409). Clinical materials that are not decontaminated in a well-constructed closed container during transport. The are subject to OSHA and U.S. Department of Transportation container should be labeled with the biohazard symbol (13,14). regulations regarding transportation and shipping of infectious Because these teeth will be autoclaved before clinical exercises materials (13,410). or study, use of the most economical storage solution (e.g., Appliances and prostheses delivered to the patient should water or saline) might be practical. Liquid chemical germi- be free of contamination. Communication between the labo- cides can also be used but do not reliably disinfect both exter- ratory and the dental practice is also key at this stage to deter- nal surface and interior pulp tissue (403,404). mine which one is responsible for the final disinfection process. Before being used in an educational setting, the teeth should If the dental laboratory staff provides the disinfection, an EPA- be heat-sterilized to allow safe handling. Microbial growth can registered hospital disinfectant (low to intermediate) should be eliminated by using an autoclave cycle for 40 minutes (405), be used, written documentation of the disinfection method 34 MMWR December 19, 2003 provided, and the item placed in a tamper-evident container pans, or lathes) should be cleaned and disinfected between before returning it to the dental office. If such documentation patients and according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Pres- is not provided, the dental office is responsible for final disin- sure pots and water baths are particularly susceptible to con- fection procedures. tamination with microorganisms and should be cleaned and Dental prostheses or impressions brought into the labora- disinfected between patients (422). In the majority of instances, tory can be contaminated with bacteria, viruses, and fungi these items can be cleaned and disinfected with an EPA- (411,412). Dental prostheses, impressions, orthodontic registered hospital disinfectant. Environmental surfaces should appliances, and other prosthodontic materials (e.g., occlusal be barrier-protected or cleaned and disinfected in the same man- rims, temporary prostheses, bite registrations, or extracted ner as in the dental treatment area. teeth) should be thoroughly cleaned (i.e., blood and bioburden Unless waste generated in the dental laboratory (e.g., dis- removed), disinfected with an EPA-registered hospital disin- posable trays or impression materials) falls under the category fectant with a tuberculocidal claim, and thoroughly rinsed of regulated medical waste, it can be discarded with general before being handled in the in-office laboratory or sent to an waste. Personnel should dispose of sharp items (e.g., burs, dis- off-site laboratory (2,244,249,407). The best time to clean posable blades, and orthodontic wires) in puncture-resistant and disinfect impressions, prostheses, or appliances is as soon containers. as possible after removal from the patient’s mouth before dry- ing of blood or other bioburden can occur. Specific guidance Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes regarding cleaning and disinfecting techniques for various or Surgical Smoke materials is available (260,413–416). DHCP are advised to During surgical procedures that use a laser or electrosurgical consult with manufacturers regarding the stability of specific unit, the thermal destruction of tissue creates a smoke materials during disinfection. byproduct. Laser plumes or surgical smoke represent another In the laboratory, a separate receiving and disinfecting area potential risk for DHCP (423–425). Lasers transfer electro- should be established to reduce contamination in the produc- magnetic energy into tissues, resulting in the release of a heated tion area. Bringing untreated items into the laboratory increases plume that includes particles, gases (e.g., hydrogen cyanide, chances for cross infection (260). If no communication has benzene, and formaldehyde), tissue debris, viruses, and offen- been received regarding prior cleaning and disinfection of a sive odors. One concern is that aerosolized infectious material material, the dental laboratory staff should perform cleaning in the laser plume might reach the nasal mucosa of the laser and disinfection procedures before handling. If during operator and adjacent DHCP. Although certain viruses (e.g., manipulation of a material or appliance a previously undetec- varicella-zoster virus and herpes simplex virus) appear not to ted area of blood or bioburden becomes apparent, cleaning aerosolize efficiently (426,427), other viruses and various bac- and disinfection procedures should be repeated. Transfer of teria (e.g., human papilloma virus, HIV, coagulase-negative oral microorganisms into and onto impressions has been docu- Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium species, and Neisseria species) mented (417–419). Movement of these organisms onto den- have been detected in laser plumes (428–434). However, the tal casts has also been demonstrated (420). Certain microbes presence of an infectious agent in a laser plume might not be have been demonstrated to remain viable within gypsum cast sufficient to cause disease from airborne exposure, especially if materials for <7 days (421). Incorrect handling of contami- the agent’s normal mode of transmission is not airborne. No nated impressions, prostheses, or appliances, therefore, offers evidence indicates that HIV or HBV have been transmitted an opportunity for transmission of microorganisms (260). through aerosolization and inhalation (435). Although con- Whether in the office or laboratory, PPE should be worn until tinuing studies are needed to evaluate the risk for DHCP of disinfection is completed (1,2,7,10,13). laser plumes and electrosurgery smoke, following NIOSH rec- If laboratory items (e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, or ommendations (425) and practices developed by the Associa- laboratory knives) are used on contaminated or potentially con- tion of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) might be taminated appliances, prostheses, or other material, they should practical (436). These practices include using 1) standard pre- be heat-sterilized, disinfected between patients, or discarded (i.e., cautions (e.g., high-filtration surgical masks and possibly full disposable items should be used) (260,407). Heat-tolerant items face shields) (437); 2) central room suction units with in-line used in the mouth (e.g., metal impression tray or face bow fork) filters to collect particulate matter from minimal plumes; and should be heat-sterilized before being used on another patient 3) dedicated mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high- (2,407). Items that do not normally contact the patient, pros- efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts of laser plume thetic device, or appliance but frequently become contaminated particles. Local smoke evacuation systems have been recom- and cannot withstand heat-sterilization (e.g., articulators, case Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 35 mended by consensus organizations, and these systems can mendations for expanded precautions to prevent transmission improve the quality of the operating field. Employers should of M. tuberculosis and other organisms that can be spread by be aware of this emerging problem and advise employees of airborne, droplet, or contact routes have been detailed in other the potential hazards of laser smoke (438). However, this con- guidelines (5,11,20). cern remains unresolved in dental practice and no recommen- TB transmission is controlled through a hierarchy of mea- dation is provided here. sures, including administrative controls, environmental con- trols, and personal respiratory protection. The main M. tuberculosis administrative goals of a TB infection-control program are early detection of a person with active TB disease and prompt isola- Patients infected with M. tuberculosis occasionally seek tion from susceptible persons to reduce the risk of transmis- urgent dental treatment at outpatient dental settings. Under- sion. Although DHCP are not responsible for diagnosis and standing the pathogenesis of the development of TB will help treatment of TB, they should be trained to recognize signs and DHCP determine how to manage such patients. symptoms to help with prompt detection. Because potential M. tuberculosis is a bacterium carried in airborne infective for transmission of M. tuberculosis exists in outpatient settings, droplet nuclei that can be generated when persons with pul- dental practices should develop a TB control program appro- monary or laryngeal TB sneeze, cough, speak, or sing (439). priate for their level of risk (20,21). These small particles (1–5 µm) can stay suspended in the air (cid:127) A community risk assessment should be conducted peri- for hours (440). Infection occurs when a susceptible person odically, and TB infection-control policies for each dental inhales droplet nuclei containing M. tuberculosis, which then setting should be based on the risk assessment. The poli- travel to the alveoli of the lungs. Usually within 2–12 weeks cies should include provisions for detection and referral after initial infection with M. tuberculosis, immune response of patients who might have undiagnosed active TB; man- prevents further spread of the TB bacteria, although they can agement of patients with active TB who require urgent remain alive in the lungs for years, a condition termed latent dental care; and DHCP education, counseling, and TST TB infection. Persons with latent TB infection usually exhibit screening. a reactive tuberculin skin test (TST), have no symptoms of (cid:127) DHCP who have contact with patients should have a active disease, and are not infectious. However, they can baseline TST, preferably by using a two-step test at the develop active disease later in life if they do not receive treat- beginning of employment. The facility’s level of TB risk ment for their latent infection. will determine the need for routine follow-up TST. Approximately 5% of persons who have been recently (cid:127) While taking patients’ initial medical histories and at infected and not treated for latent TB infection will progress periodic updates, dental DHCP should routinely ask all from infection to active disease during the first 1–2 years after patients whether they have a history of TB disease or symp- infection; another 5% will develop active disease later in life. toms indicative of TB. Thus, approximately 90% of U.S. persons with latent TB (cid:127) Patients with a medical history or symptoms indicative of infection do not progress to active TB disease. Although both undiagnosed active TB should be referred promptly for latent TB infection and active TB disease are described as TB, medical evaluation to determine possible infectiousness. only the person with active disease is contagious and presents Such patients should not remain in the dental-care facil- a risk of transmission. Symptoms of active TB disease include ity any longer than required to evaluate their dental con- a productive cough, night sweats, fatigue, malaise, fever, and dition and arrange a referral. While in the dental unexplained weight loss. Certain immunocompromising medi- health-care facility, the patient should be isolated from cal conditions (e.g., HIV) increase the risk that TB infection other patients and DHCP, wear a surgical mask when not will progress to active disease at a faster rate (441). being evaluated, or be instructed to cover their mouth and Overall, the risk borne by DHCP for exposure to a patient nose when coughing or sneezing. with active TB disease is probably low (20,21). Only one report (cid:127) Elective dental treatment should be deferred until a phy- exists of TB transmission in a dental office (442), and TST con- sician confirms that a patient does not have infectious TB, versions among DHCP are also low (443,444). However, in or if the patient is diagnosed with active TB disease, until certain cases, DHCP or the community served by the dental confirmed the patient is no longer infectious. facility might be at relatively high risk for exposure to TB. (cid:127) If urgent dental care is provided for a patient who has, or Surgical masks do not prevent inhalation of M. tuberculosis is suspected of having active TB disease, the care should droplet nuclei, and therefore, standard precautions are not be provided in a facility (e.g., hospital) that provides air- sufficient to prevent transmission of this organism. Recom- borne infection isolation (i.e., using such engineering con- 36 MMWR December 19, 2003 trols as TB isolation rooms, negatively pressured relative immigrant from the United Kingdom (453). Compared with to the corridors, with air either exhausted to the outside CJD patients, those with vCJD are younger (28 years versus or HEPA-filtered if recirculation is necessary). Standard 68 years median age at death), and have a longer duration of surgical face masks do not protect against TB transmis- illness (13 months versus 4.5 months). Also, vCJD patients sion; DHCP should use respiratory protection (e.g., fit- characteristically exhibit sensory and psychiatric symptoms that tested, disposable N-95 respirators). are uncommon with CJD. Another difference includes the ease (cid:127) Settings that do not require use of respiratory protection with which the presence of prions is consistently demonstrated because they do not treat active TB patients and do not in lymphoreticular tissues (e.g., tonsil) in vCJD patients by perform cough-inducing procedures on potential active immunohistochemistry (454). TB patients do not need to develop a written respiratory CJD and vCJD are transmissible diseases, but not through protection program. the air or casual contact. All known cases of iatrogenic CJD (cid:127) Any DHCP with a persistent cough (i.e., lasting >3 weeks), have resulted from exposure to infected central nervous tissue especially in the presence of other signs or symptoms com- (e.g., brain and dura mater), pituitary, or eye tissue. Studies in patible with active TB (e.g., weight loss, night sweats, experimental animals have determined that other tissues have fatigue, bloody sputum, anorexia, or fever), should be low or no detectable infectivity (243,455,456). Limited evaluated promptly. The DHCP should not return to the experimental studies have demonstrated that scrapie (a TSE in workplace until a diagnosis of TB has been excluded or sheep) can be transmitted to healthy hamsters and mice by the DHCP is on therapy and a physician has determined exposing oral tissues to infectious homogenate (457,458). that the DHCP is noninfectious. These animal models and experimental designs might not be directly applicable to human transmission and clinical den- Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Other tistry, but they indicate a theoretical risk of transmitting prion Prion Diseases diseases through perioral exposures. According to published reports, iatrogenic transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) belongs to a group of rap- CJD has occurred in humans under three circumstances: after idly progressive, invariably fatal, degenerative neurological dis- use of contaminated electroencephalography depth electrodes orders, transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) that and neurosurgical equipment (459); after use of extracted affect both humans and animals and are thought to be caused pituitary hormones (460,461); and after implant of contami- by infection with an unusual pathogen called a prion. Prions nated corneal (462) and dura mater grafts (463,464) from are isoforms of a normal protein, capable of self-propagation humans. The equipment-related cases occurred before the rou- although they lack nucleic acid. Prion diseases have an incu- tine implementation of sterilization procedures used in health- bation period of years and are usually fatal within 1 year of care facilities. diagnosis. Case-control studies have found no evidence that dental Among humans, TSEs include CJD, Gerstmann-Straussler- procedures increase the risk of iatrogenic transmission of TSEs Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia, kuru, and vari- among humans. In these studies, CJD transmission was not ant CJD (vCJD). Occurring in sporadic, familial, and acquired associated with dental procedures (e.g., root canals or extrac- (i.e., iatrogenic) forms, CJD has an annual incidence in the tions), with convincing evidence of prion detection in human United States and other countries of approximately 1 case/ blood, saliva, or oral tissues, or with DHCP becoming occu- million population (445–448). In approximately 85% of pationally infected with CJD (465–467). In 2000, prions were affected patients, CJD occurs as a sporadic disease with no not found in the dental pulps of eight patients with recognizable pattern of transmission. A smaller proportion of neuropathologically confirmed sporadic CJD by using elec- patients (5%–15%) experience familial CJD because of inher- trophoresis and a Western blot technique (468). ited mutations of the prion protein gene (448). Prions exhibit unusual resistance to conventional chemical vCJD is distinguishable clinically and neuropathologically and physical decontamination procedures. Considering this from classic CJD, and strong epidemiologic and laboratory resistance and the invariably fatal outcome of CJD, procedures evidence indicates a causal relationship with bovine spongiform for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments potentially con- encephalopathy (BSE), a progressive neurological disorder of taminated with the CJD prion have been controversial for years. cattle commonly known as mad cow disease (449–451). vCJD, Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of sporadic CJD trans- was reported first in the United Kingdom in 1996 (449) and mission during dental and oral surgical procedures is low to subsequently in other European countries (452). Only one nil. Until additional information exists regarding the trans- case of vCJD has been reported in the United States, in an missibility of CJD or vCJD, special precautions in addition to Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 37 standard precautions might be indicated when treating known care–associated infections among patients and occupational CJD or vCJD patients; the following list of precautions is pro- exposures among DHCP. Medical errors are caused by faulty vided for consideration without recommendation systems, processes, and conditions that lead persons to make (243,249,277,469): mistakes or fail to prevent errors being made by others (470). (cid:127) Use single-use disposable items and equipment whenever Effective program evaluation is a systematic way to ensure pro- possible. cedures are useful, feasible, ethical, and accurate. Program evalu- (cid:127) Consider items difficult to clean (e.g., endodontic files, ation is an essential organizational practice; however, such broaches, and carbide and diamond burs) as single-use evaluation is not practiced consistently across program areas, disposables and discard after one use. nor is it sufficiently well-integrated into the day-to-day man- (cid:127) To minimize drying of tissues and body fluids on a device, agement of the majority of programs (471). keep the instrument moist until cleaned and decontaminated. A successful infection-control program depends on develop- (cid:127) Clean instruments thoroughly and steam-autoclave at 134ºC ing standard operating procedures, evaluating practices, routinely for 18 minutes. This is the least stringent of sterilization documenting adverse outcomes (e.g., occupational exposures methods offered by the World Health Organization. The to blood) and work-related illnesses in DHCP, and monitoring complete list (469) is available at http://www.who.int/emc- health-care–associated infections in patients. Strategies and tools documents/tse/whocdscsraph2003c.html. to evaluate the infection-control program can include periodic (cid:127) Do not use flash sterilization for processing instruments observational assessments, checklists to document procedures, or devices. and routine review of occupational exposures to bloodborne Potential infectivity of oral tissues in CJD or vCJD patients is pathogens. Evaluation offers an opportunity to improve the an unresolved concern. CDC maintains an active surveillance effectiveness of both the infection-control program and dental- program on CJD. Additional information and resources are practice protocols. If deficiencies or problems in the implemen- available at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cjd/cjd.htm. tation of infection-control procedures are identified, further evaluation is needed to eliminate the problems. Examples of Program Evaluation infection-control program evaluation activities are provided (Table 5). The goal of a dental infection-control program is to provide a safe working environment that will reduce the risk of health- TABLE 5. Examples of methods for evaluating infection-control programs Program element Evaluation activity Appropriate immunization of dental health-care personnel (DHCP). Conduct annual review of personnel records to ensure up-to-date immunizations. Assessment of occupational exposures to infectious agents. Report occupational exposures to infectious agents. Document the steps that occurred around the exposure and plan how such exposure can be prevented in the future. Comprehensive postexposure management plan and medical follow-up program Ensure the postexposure management plan is clear, complete, and available at all after occupational exposures to infectious agents. times to all DHCP. All staff should understand the plan, which should include toll- free phone numbers for access to additional information. Adherence to hand hygiene before and after patient care. Observe and document circumstances of appropriate or inappropriate handwashing. Review findings in a staff meeting. Proper use of personal protective equipment to prevent occupational exposures to Observe and document the use of barrier precautions and careful handling of infectious agents. sharps. Review findings in a staff meeting. Routine and appropriate sterilization of instruments using a biologic monitoring Monitor paper log of steam cycle and temperature strip with each sterilization load, system. and examine results of weekly biologic monitoring. Take appropriate action when failure of sterilization process is noted. Evaluation and implementation of safer medical devices. Conduct an annual review of the exposure control plan and consider new developments in safer medical devices. Compliance of water in routine dental procedures with current drinking U.S. Monitor dental water quality as recommended by the equipment manufacturer, Environmental Protection Agency water standards (fewer than 500 CFU of using commercial self-contained test kits, or commercial water-testing laboratories. heterotrophic water bacteria). Proper handling and disposal of medical waste. Observe the safe disposal of regulated and nonregulated medical waste and take preventive measures if hazardous situations occur. Health-care–associated infections. Assess the unscheduled return of patients after procedures and evaluate them for an infectious process. A trend might require formal evaluation. 38 MMWR December 19, 2003 Infection-Control Research public comment period (Box). This list is not exhaustive and Considerations does not represent a CDC research agenda, but rather is an effort to identify certain concerns, stimulate discussion, and Although the number of published studies concerning den- provide direction for determining future action by clinical, tal infection control has increased in recent years, questions basic science, and epidemiologic investigators, as well as health regarding infection-control practices and their effectiveness and professional organizations, clinicians, and policy makers. remain unanswered. Multiple concerns were identified by the working group for this report, as well as by others during the BOX. Dental infection-control research considerations Education and promotion (cid:127) Design strategies to communicate, to the public and providers, the risk of disease transmission in dentistry. (cid:127) Promote use of protocols for recommended postexposure management and follow-up. (cid:127) Educate and train dental health-care personnel (DHCP) to screen and evaluate safer dental devices by using tested design and performance criteria. Laboratory-based research (cid:127) Develop animal models to determine the risk of transmitting organisms through inhalation of contaminated aerosols (e.g., influenza) produced from rotary dental instruments. (cid:127) Conduct studies to determine the effectiveness of gloves (i.e., material compatibility and duration of use). (cid:127) Develop devices with passive safety features to prevent percutaneous injuries. (cid:127) Study the effect of alcohol-based hand-hygiene products on retention of latex proteins and other dental allergens (e.g., methylmethacrylate, glutaraldehyde, thiurams) on the hands of DHCP after latex glove use. (cid:127) Investigate the applicability of other types of sterilization procedures (e.g., hydrogen peroxide gas plasma) in dentistry. (cid:127) Encourage manufacturers to determine optimal methods and frequency for testing dental-unit waterlines and maintaining dental-unit water-quality standards. (cid:127) Determine the potential for internal contamination of low-speed handpieces, including the motor, and other devices con- nected to dental air and water supplies, as well as more efficient ways to clean, lubricate, and sterilize handpieces and other devices attached to air or waterlines. (cid:127) Investigate the infectivity of oral tissues in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) or variant CJD patients. (cid:127) Determine the most effective methods to disinfect dental impression materials. (cid:127) Investigate the viability of pathogenic organisms on dental materials (e.g., impression materials, acrylic resin, or gypsum materials) and dental laboratory equipment. (cid:127) Determine the most effective methods for sterilization or disinfection of digital radiology equipment. (cid:127) Evaluate the effects of repetitive reprocessing cycles on burs and endodontic files. (cid:127) Investigate the potential infectivity of vapors generated from the various lasers used for oral procedures. Clinical and population-based epidemiologic research and development (cid:127) Continue to characterize the epidemiology of blood contacts, particularly percutaneous injuries, and the effectiveness of prevention measures. (cid:127) Further assess the effectiveness of double gloving in preventing blood contact during routine and surgical dental procedures. (cid:127) Continue to assess the stress placed on gloves during dental procedures and the potential for developing defects during different procedures. (cid:127) Develop methods for evaluating the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of infection-control interventions. (cid:127) Determine how infection-control guidelines affect the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of DHCP. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 39 Recommendations cific to their assigned duties (IB, IC) (5,11,13, 14,16,19,22). Each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing 2. Provide educational information appropriate in scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. Rankings content and vocabulary to the educational level, are based on the system used by CDC and the Healthcare literacy, and language of DHCP (IB, IC) (5,13). Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) C. Immunization Programs to categorize recommendations: 1. Develop a written comprehensive policy regard- Category IA. Strongly recommended for implementation ing immunizing DHCP, including a list of all and strongly supported by well-designed experimental, clini- required and recommended immunizations (IB) cal, or epidemiologic studies. (5,17,18). Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation 2. Refer DHCP to a prearranged qualified health- and supported by experimental, clinical, or epidemiologic stud- care professional or to their own health-care pro- ies and a strong theoretical rationale. fessional to receive all appropriate immunizations Category IC. Required for implementation as mandated based on the latest recommendations as well as by federal or state regulation or standard. When IC is used, a their medical history and risk for occupational second rating can be included to provide the basis of existing exposure (IB) (5,17). scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. Because D. Exposure Prevention and Postexposure Manage- of state differences, the reader should not assume that the ment absence of a IC implies the absence of state regulations. 1. Develop a comprehensive postexposure manage- Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported ment and medical follow-up program (IB, IC) by suggestive clinical or epidemiologic studies or a theoretical (5,13,14,19). rationale. a. Include policies and procedures for prompt Unresolved issue. No recommendation. Insufficient evi- reporting, evaluation, counseling, treatment, dence or no consensus regarding efficacy exists. and medical follow-up of occupational I. Personnel Health Elements of an Infection-Control exposures. Program b. Establish mechanisms for referral to a quali- A. General Recommendations fied health-care professional for medical 1. Develop a written health program for DHCP evaluation and follow-up. that includes policies, procedures, and guidelines c. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by for education and training; immunizations; using a two-step test, for all DHCP who exposure prevention and postexposure manage- might have contact with persons with sus- ment; medical conditions, work-related illness, pected or confirmed infectious TB, regard- and associated work restrictions; contact derma- less of the risk classification of the setting titis and latex hypersensitivity; and maintenance (IB) (20). of records, data management, and confidential- E. Medical Conditions, Work-Related Illness, and ity (IB) (5,16–18,22). Work Restrictions 2. Establish referral arrangements with qualified 1. Develop and have readily available to all DHCP health-care professionals to ensure prompt and comprehensive written policies regarding work appropriate provision of preventive services, restriction and exclusion that include a statement occupationally related medical services, and of authority defining who can implement such postexposure management with medical follow- policies (IB) (5,22). up (IB, IC) (5,13,19,22). 2. Develop policies for work restriction and exclu- B. Education and Training sion that encourage DHCP to seek appropriate 1. Provide DHCP 1) on initial employment, preventive and curative care and report their 2) when new tasks or procedures affect the illnesses, medical conditions, or treatments that employee’s occupational exposure, and 3) at a can render them more susceptible to opportu- minimum, annually, with education and train- nistic infection or exposures; do not penalize ing regarding occupational exposure to poten- DHCP with loss of wages, benefits, or job sta- tially infectious agents and infection-control tus (IB) (5,22). procedures/protocols appropriate for and spe- 40 MMWR December 19, 2003 3. Develop policies and procedures for evaluation, the vaccination should sign a declination form diagnosis, and management of DHCP with sus- to be kept on file with the employer (IC) (13). pected or known occupational contact dermati- B. Preventing Exposures to Blood and OPIM tis (IB) (32). 1. General recommendations 4. Seek definitive diagnosis by a qualified health- a. Use standard precautions (OSHA’s blood- care professional for any DHCP with suspected borne pathogen standard retains the term latex allergy to carefully determine its specific universal precautions) for all patient encoun- etiology and appropriate treatment as well as ters (IA, IC) (11,13,19,53). work restrictions and accommodations (IB) (32). b. Consider sharp items (e.g., needles, scalers, F. Records Maintenance, Data Management, and burs, lab knives, and wires) that are contami- Confidentiality nated with patient blood and saliva as 1. Establish and maintain confidential medical potentially infective and establish engineer- records (e.g., immunization records and docu- ing controls and work practices to prevent mentation of tests received as a result of occupa- injuries (IB, IC) (6,13,113). tional exposure) for all DHCP (IB, IC) (5,13). c. Implement a written, comprehensive pro- 2. Ensure that the practice complies with all appli- gram designed to minimize and manage cable federal, state, and local laws regarding DHCP exposures to blood and body fluids medical recordkeeping and confidentiality (IC) (IB, IC). (13,14,19,97). (13,34). 2. Engineering and work-practice controls II. Preventing Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens a. Identify, evaluate, and select devices with A. HBV Vaccination engineered safety features at least annually 1. Offer the HBV vaccination series to all DHCP and as they become available on the market with potential occupational exposure to blood (e.g., safer anesthetic syringes, blunt suture or other potentially infectious material (IA, IC) needle, retractable scalpel, or needleless IV (2,13,14,19). systems) (IC) (13,97,110–112). 2. Always follow U.S. Public Health Service/CDC b. Place used disposable syringes and needles, recommendations for hepatitis B vaccination, scalpel blades, and other sharp items in serologic testing, follow-up, and booster dosing appropriate puncture-resistant containers (IA, IC) (13,14,19). located as close as feasible to the area in which 3. Test DHCP for anti-HBs 1–2 months after the items are used (IA, IC) (2,7,13,19,113, completion of the 3-dose vaccination series (IA, 115). IC) (14,19). c. Do not recap used needles by using both 4. DHCP should complete a second 3-dose vac- hands or any other technique that involves cine series or be evaluated to determine if they directing the point of a needle toward any are HBsAg-positive if no antibody response part of the body. Do not bend, break, or occurs to the primary vaccine series (IA, IC) remove needles before disposal (IA, IC) (14,19). (2,7,8,13,97,113). 5. Retest for anti-HBs at the completion of the sec- d. Use either a one-handed scoop technique or ond vaccine series. If no response to the second a mechanical device designed for holding the 3-dose series occurs, nonresponders should be needle cap when recapping needles (e.g., tested for HBsAg (IC) (14,19). between multiple injections and before 6. Counsel nonresponders to vaccination who are removing from a nondisposable aspirating HBsAg-negative regarding their susceptibility to syringe) (IA, IC) (2,7,8,13,14,113). HBV infection and precautions to take (IA, IC) 3. Postexposure management and prophylaxis (14,19). a. Follow CDC recommendations after percu- 7. Provide employees appropriate education regard- taneous, mucous membrane, or nonintact ing the risks of HBV transmission and the avail- skin exposure to blood or other potentially ability of the vaccine. Employees who decline infectious material (IA, IC) (13,14,19). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 41 III. Hand Hygiene 6. Do not wear hand or nail jewelry if it makes A. General Considerations donning gloves more difficult or compromises 1. Perform hand hygiene with either a the fit and integrity of the glove (II) (123,142, nonantimicrobial or antimicrobial soap and 143). water when hands are visibly dirty or contami- IV. PPE nated with blood or other potentially infectious A. Masks, Protective Eyewear, and Face Shields material. If hands are not visibly soiled, an alco- 1. Wear a surgical mask and eye protection with hol-based hand rub can also be used. Follow the solid side shields or a face shield to protect manufacturer’s instructions (IA) (123). mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth 2. Indications for hand hygiene include during procedures likely to generate splashing a. when hands are visibly soiled (IA, IC); or spattering of blood or other body fluids (IB, b. after barehanded touching of inanimate IC) (1,2,7,8,11,13,137). objects likely to be contaminated by blood, 2. Change masks between patients or during saliva, or respiratory secretions (IA, IC); patient treatment if the mask becomes wet (IB) c. before and after treating each patient (IB); (2). d. before donning gloves (IB); and 3. Clean with soap and water, or if visibly soiled, e. immediately after removing gloves (IB, IC) clean and disinfect reusable facial protective (7–9,11,13,113,120–123,125,126,138). equipment (e.g., clinician and patient protec- 3. For oral surgical procedures, perform surgical tive eyewear or face shields) between patients (II) hand antisepsis before donning sterile surgeon’s (2). gloves. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions by B. Protective Clothing using either an antimicrobial soap and water, or 1. Wear protective clothing (e.g., reusable or dis- soap and water followed by drying hands and posable gown, laboratory coat, or uniform) that application of an alcohol-based surgical hand- covers personal clothing and skin (e.g., forearms) scrub product with persistent activity (IB) (121– likely to be soiled with blood, saliva, or OPIM 123,127–133,144,145). (IB, IC) (7,8,11,13,137). 4. Store liquid hand-care products in either dispos- 2. Change protective clothing if visibly soiled (134); able closed containers or closed containers that change immediately or as soon as feasible if pen- can be washed and dried before refilling. Do not etrated by blood or other potentially infectious add soap or lotion to (i.e., top off) a partially fluids (IB, IC) (13). empty dispenser (IA) (9,120,122,149,150). 3. Remove barrier protection, including gloves, B. Special Considerations for Hand Hygiene and mask, eyewear, and gown before departing work Glove Use area (e.g., dental patient care, instrument pro- 1. Use hand lotions to prevent skin dryness associ- cessing, or laboratory areas) (IC) (13). ated with handwashing (IA) (153,154). C. Gloves 2. Consider the compatibility of lotion and anti- 1. Wear medical gloves when a potential exists for septic products and the effect of petroleum or contacting blood, saliva, OPIM, or mucous other oil emollients on the integrity of gloves membranes (IB, IC) (1,2,7,8,13). during product selection and glove use (IB) 2. Wear a new pair of medical gloves for each (2,14,122,155). patient, remove them promptly after use, and 3. Keep fingernails short with smooth, filed edges wash hands immediately to avoid transfer of to allow thorough cleaning and prevent glove microorganisms to other patients or environ- tears (II) (122,123,156). ments (IB) (1,7,8,123). 4. Do not wear artificial fingernails or extenders 3. Remove gloves that are torn, cut, or punctured when having direct contact with patients at high as soon as feasible and wash hands before risk (e.g., those in intensive care units or operat- regloving (IB, IC) (13,210,211). ing rooms) (IA) (123,157–160). 4. Do not wash surgeon’s or patient examination 5. Use of artificial fingernails is usually not recom- gloves before use or wash, disinfect, or sterilize mended (II) (157–160). gloves for reuse (IB, IC) (13,138,177,212,213). 42 MMWR December 19, 2003 5. Ensure that appropriate gloves in the correct size 5. Use of heat-stable semicritical alternatives is are readily accessible (IC) (13). encouraged (IB) (2). 6. Use appropriate gloves (e.g., puncture- and 6. Reprocess heat-sensitive critical and semi-criti- chemical-resistant utility gloves) when cleaning cal instruments by using FDA-cleared sterilant/ instruments and performing housekeeping tasks high-level disinfectants or an FDA-cleared low- involving contact with blood or OPIM (IB, IC) temperature sterilization method (e.g., ethylene (7,13,15). oxide). Follow manufacturer’s instructions for use 7. Consult with glove manufacturers regarding the of chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants chemical compatibility of glove material and (IB) (243). dental materials used (II). 7. Single-use disposable instruments are acceptable D. Sterile Surgeon’s Gloves and Double Gloving alternatives if they are used only once and dis- During Oral Surgical Procedures posed of correctly (IB, IC) (243,383). 1. Wear sterile surgeon’s gloves when performing 8. Do not use liquid chemical sterilants/high-level oral surgical procedures (IB) (2,8,137). disinfectants for environmental surface disinfec- 2. No recommendation is offered regarding the tion or as holding solutions (IB, IC) (243,245). effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves to 9. Ensure that noncritical patient-care items are prevent disease transmission during oral surgi- barrier-protected or cleaned, or if visibly soiled, cal procedures. The majority of studies among cleaned and disinfected after each use with an HCP and DHCP have demonstrated a lower fre- EPA-registered hospital disinfectant. If visibly quency of inner glove perforation and visible contaminated with blood, use an EPA-registered blood on the surgeon’s hands when double gloves hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim are worn; however, the effectiveness of wearing (i.e., intermediate level) (IB) (2,243,244). two pairs of gloves in preventing disease trans- 10.Inform DHCP of all OSHA guidelines for mission has not been demonstrated (Unresolved exposure to chemical agents used for disinfec- issue). tion and sterilization. Using this report, identify V. Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity areas and tasks that have potential for exposure A. General Recommendations (IC) (15). 1. Educate DHCP regarding the signs, symptoms, B. Instrument Processing Area and diagnoses of skin reactions associated with fre- 1. Designate a central processing area. Divide the quent hand hygiene and glove use (IB) (5,31,32). instrument processing area, physically or, at a 2. Screen all patients for latex allergy (e.g., take minimum, spatially, into distinct areas for health history and refer for medical consulta- 1) receiving, cleaning, and decontamination; tion when latex allergy is suspected) (IB) (32). 2) preparation and packaging; 3) sterilization; 3. Ensure a latex-safe environment for patients and and 4) storage. Do not store instruments in an DHCP with latex allergy (IB) (32). area where contaminated instruments are held 4. Have emergency treatment kits with latex-free or cleaned (II) (173,247,248). products available at all times (II) (32). 2. Train DHCP to employ work practices that pre- VI. Sterilization and Disinfection of Patient-Care Items vent contamination of clean areas (II). A. General Recommendations C. Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination Work 1. Use only FDA-cleared medical devices for ster- Area ilization and follow the manufacturer’s instruc- 1. Minimize handling of loose contaminated tions for correct use (IB) (248). instruments during transport to the instrument 2. Clean and heat-sterilize critical dental instru- processing area. Use work-practice controls (e.g., ments before each use (IA) (2,137,243,244, carry instruments in a covered container) to 246,249,407). minimize exposure potential (II). Clean all vis- 3. Clean and heat-sterilize semicritical items before ible blood and other contamination from den- each use (IB) (2,249,260,407). tal instruments and devices before sterilization 4. Allow packages to dry in the sterilizer before they or disinfection procedures (IA) (243,249–252). are handled to avoid contamination (IB) (247). 2. Use automated cleaning equipment (e.g., ultra- sonic cleaner or washer-disinfector) to remove Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 43 debris to improve cleaning effectiveness and 7. Do not store critical instruments unwrapped (IB) decrease worker exposure to blood (IB) (2,253). (248). 3. Use work-practice controls that minimize con- F. Sterilization Monitoring tact with sharp instruments if manual cleaning 1. Use mechanical, chemical, and biological moni- is necessary (e.g., long-handled brush) (IC) (14). tors according to the manufacturer’s instructions 4. Wear puncture- and chemical-resistant/heavy- to ensure the effectiveness of the sterilization duty utility gloves for instrument cleaning and process (IB) (248,278,279). decontamination procedures (IB) (7). 2. Monitor each load with mechanical (e.g., time, 5. Wear appropriate PPE (e.g., mask, protective temperature, and pressure) and chemical indi- eyewear, and gown) when splashing or spraying cators (II) (243,248). is anticipated during cleaning (IC) (13). 3. Place a chemical indicator on the inside of each D. Preparation and Packaging package. If the internal indicator is not visible 1. Use an internal chemical indicator in each pack- from the outside, also place an exterior chemi- age. If the internal indicator cannot be seen from cal indicator on the package (II) (243,254,257). outside the package, also use an external indica- 4. Place items/packages correctly and loosely into tor (II) (243,254,257). the sterilizer so as not to impede penetration of 2. Use a container system or wrapping compatible the sterilant (IB) (243). with the type of sterilization process used and 5. Do not use instrument packs if mechanical or that has received FDA clearance (IB) (243,247, chemical indicators indicate inadequate process- 256). ing (IB) (243,247,248). 3. Before sterilization of critical and semicritical 6. Monitor sterilizers at least weekly by using a bio- instruments, inspect instruments for cleanliness, logical indicator with a matching control (i.e., then wrap or place them in containers designed biological indicator and control from same lot to maintain sterility during storage (e.g., cassettes number) (IB) (2,9,243,247,278,279). and organizing trays) (IA) (2,247,255,256). 7. Use a biological indicator for every sterilizer load E. Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments that contains an implantable device. Verify 1. Clean and dry instruments before the unwrapped results before using the implantable device, sterilization cycle (IB) (248). whenever possible (IB) (243,248). 2. Use mechanical and chemical indicators for each 8. The following are recommended in the case of a unwrapped sterilization cycle (i.e., place an positive spore test: internal chemical indicator among the instru- a. Remove the sterilizer from service and ments or items to be sterilized) (IB) (243,258). review sterilization procedures (e.g., work 3. Allow unwrapped instruments to dry and cool practices and use of mechanical and chemi- in the sterilizer before they are handled to avoid cal indicators) to determine whether opera- contamination and thermal injury (II) (260). tor error could be responsible (II) (8). 4. Semicritical instruments that will be used b. Retest the sterilizer by using biological, immediately or within a short time can be ster- mechanical, and chemical indicators after ilized unwrapped on a tray or in a container sys- correcting any identified procedural prob- tem, provided that the instruments are handled lems (II). aseptically during removal from the sterilizer and c. If the repeat spore test is negative, and transport to the point of use (II). mechanical and chemical indicators are 5. Critical instruments intended for immediate within normal limits, put the sterilizer back reuse can be sterilized unwrapped if the instru- in service (II) (9,243). ments are maintained sterile during removal from 9. The following are recommended if the repeat the sterilizer and transport to the point of use spore test is positive: (e.g., transported in a sterile covered container) a. Do not use the sterilizer until it has been (IB) (258). inspected or repaired or the exact reason for 6. Do not sterilize implantable devices unwrapped the positive test has been determined (II) (IB) (243,247). (9,243). 44 MMWR December 19, 2003 b. Recall, to the extent possible, and reprocess clean (e.g., switches on dental chairs) and change all items processed since the last negative surface barriers between patients (II) (1,2,260, spore test (II) (9,243,283). 288). c. Before placing the sterilizer back in service, 2. Clean and disinfect clinical contact surfaces that rechallenge the sterilizer with biological are not barrier-protected, by using an EPA- indicator tests in three consecutive empty registered hospital disinfectant with a low- (i.e., chamber sterilization cycles after the cause HIV and HBV label claims) to intermediate-level of the sterilizer failure has been determined (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity after each and corrected (II) (9,243,283). patient. Use an intermediate-level disinfectant 10.Maintain sterilization records (i.e., mechanical, if visibly contaminated with blood (IB) chemical, and biological) in compliance with (2,243,244). state and local regulations (IB) (243). C. Housekeeping Surfaces G. Storage Area for Sterilized Items and Clean 1. Clean housekeeping surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, Dental Supplies and sinks) with a detergent and water or an EPA- 1. Implement practices on the basis of date- or registered hospital disinfectant/detergent on a event-related shelf-life for storage of wrapped, routine basis, depending on the nature of the sterilized instruments and devices (IB) (243, surface and type and degree of contamination, 284). and as appropriate, based on the location in the 2. Even for event-related packaging, at a minimum, facility, and when visibly soiled (IB) (243,244). place the date of sterilization, and if multiple 2. Clean mops and cloths after use and allow to sterilizers are used in the facility, the sterilizer dry before reuse; or use single-use, disposable used, on the outside of the packaging material mop heads or cloths (II) (243,244). to facilitate the retrieval of processed items in 3. Prepare fresh cleaning or EPA-registered disin- the event of a sterilization failure (IB) (243,247). fecting solutions daily and as instructed by the 3. Examine wrapped packages of sterilized instru- manufacturer. (II) (243,244). ments before opening them to ensure the bar- 4. Clean walls, blinds, and window curtains in rier wrap has not been compromised during patient-care areas when they are visibly dusty or storage (II) (243,284). soiled (II) (9,244). 4. Reclean, repack, and resterilize any instrument D. Spills of Blood and Body Substances package that has been compromised (II). 1. Clean spills of blood or OPIM and decontami- 5. Store sterile items and dental supplies in cov- nate surface with an EPA-registered hospital dis- ered or closed cabinets, if possible (II) (285). infectant with low- (i.e., HBV and HIV label VII. Environmental Infection Control claims) to intermediate-level (i.e., tuberculocidal A. General Recommendations claim) activity, depending on size of spill and 1. Follow the manufacturers’ instructions for cor- surface porosity (IB, IC) (13,113). rect use of cleaning and EPA-registered hospital E. Carpet and Cloth Furnishings disinfecting products (IB, IC) (243–245). 1. Avoid using carpeting and cloth-upholstered 2. Do not use liquid chemical sterilants/high-level furnishings in dental operatories, laboratories, disinfectants for disinfection of environmental and instrument processing areas (II) (9,293– surfaces (clinical contact or housekeeping) (IB, 295). IC) (243–245). F. Regulated Medical Waste 3. Use PPE, as appropriate, when cleaning and dis- 1. General Recommendations infecting environmental surfaces. Such equip- a. Develop a medical waste management pro- ment might include gloves (e.g., puncture- and gram. Disposal of regulated medical waste chemical-resistant utility), protective clothing must follow federal, state, and local regula- (e.g., gown, jacket, or lab coat), and protective tions (IC) (13,301). eyewear/face shield, and mask (IC) (13,15). b. Ensure that DHCP who handle and dispose B. Clinical Contact Surfaces of regulated medical waste are trained in 1. Use surface barriers to protect clinical contact appropriate handling and disposal methods surfaces, particularly those that are difficult to Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 45 and informed of the possible health and operative unit, ultrasonic scaler, or other safety hazards (IC) (13). dental equipment that uses the public water 2. Management of Regulated Medical Waste in system (IB, IC) (341,342,346,349,350). Dental Health-Care Facilities b. Do not use water from the public water sys- a. Use a color-coded or labeled container that tem for dental treatment, patient rinsing, or prevents leakage (e.g., biohazard bag) to con- handwashing (IB, IC) (341,342,346,349, tain nonsharp regulated medical waste (IC) 350). (13). c. For handwashing, use antimicrobial- b. Place sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel containing products that do not require blades, orthodontic bands, broken metal water for use (e.g., alcohol-based hand rubs). instruments, and burs) in an appropriate If hands are visibly contaminated, use bottled sharps container (e.g., puncture resistant, water, if available, and soap for handwashing color-coded, and leakproof). Close container or an antiseptic towelette (IB, IC) (13,122). immediately before removal or replacement 2. The following apply when the boil-water to prevent spillage or protrusion of contents advisory is cancelled: during handling, storage, transport, or ship- a. Follow guidance given by the local water ping (IC) (2,8,13,113,115). utility regarding adequate flushing of water- c. Pour blood, suctioned fluids or other liquid lines. If no guidance is provided, flush den- waste carefully into a drain connected to a tal waterlines and faucets for 1–5 minutes sanitary sewer system, if local sewage dis- before using for patient care (IC) (244,346, charge requirements are met and the state 351,352). has declared this an acceptable method of b. Disinfect dental waterlines as recommended disposal. Wear appropriate PPE while per- by the dental unit manufacturer (II). forming this task (IC) (7,9,13). IX. Special Considerations VIII. Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality A. Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached A. General Recommendations to Air and Waterlines 1. Use water that meets EPA regulatory standards 1. Clean and heat-sterilize handpieces and other for drinking water (i.e., <500 CFU/mL of het- intraoral instruments that can be removed from erotrophic water bacteria) for routine dental the air and waterlines of dental units between treatment output water (IB, IC) (341,342). patients (IB, IC) (2,246,275,356,357,360,407). 2. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer for 2. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for clean- appropriate methods and equipment to main- ing, lubrication, and sterilization of handpieces tain the recommended quality of dental water and other intraoral instruments that can be (II) (339). removed from the air and waterlines of dental 3. Follow recommendations for monitoring water units (IB) (361–363). quality provided by the manufacturer of the unit 3. Do not surface-disinfect, use liquid chemical ste- or waterline treatment product (II). rilants, or ethylene oxide on handpieces and 4. Discharge water and air for a minimum of 20– other intraoral instruments that can be removed 30 seconds after each patient, from any device from the air and waterlines of dental units (IC) connected to the dental water system that enters (2,246,250,275). the patient’s mouth (e.g., handpieces, ultrasonic 4. Do not advise patients to close their lips tightly scalers, and air/water syringes) (II) (2,311,344). around the tip of the saliva ejector to evacuate 5. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer on oral fluids (II) (364–366). the need for periodic maintenance of B. Dental Radiology antiretraction mechanisms (IB) (2,311). 1. Wear gloves when exposing radiographs and B. Boil-Water Advisories handling contaminated film packets. Use other 1. The following apply while a boil-water advisory PPE (e.g., protective eyewear, mask, and gown) is in effect: as appropriate if spattering of blood or other a. Do not deliver water from the public water body fluids is likely (IA, IC) (11,13). system to the patient through the dental 46 MMWR December 19, 2003 2. Use heat-tolerant or disposable intraoral devices 5. Use fluid infusion and administration sets (i.e., whenever possible (e.g., film-holding and posi- IV bags, tubings and connections) for one tioning devices). Clean and heat-sterilize heat- patient only and dispose of appropriately (IB) tolerant devices between patients. At a (378). minimum, high-level disinfect semicritical heat- D. Single-Use (Disposable) Devices sensitive devices, according to manufacturer’s 1. Use single-use devices for one patient only and instructions (IB) (243). dispose of them appropriately (IC) (383). 3. Transport and handle exposed radiographs in an E. Preprocedural Mouth Rinses aseptic manner to prevent contamination of 1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of developing equipment (II). preprocedural antimicrobial mouth rinses to 4. The following apply for digital radiography prevent clinical infections among DHCP or pa- sensors: tients. Although studies have demonstrated that a. Use FDA-cleared barriers (IB) (243). a preprocedural antimicrobial rinse (e.g., b. Clean and heat-sterilize, or high-level disin- chlorhexidine gluconate, essential oils, or povi- fect, between patients, barrier-protected done-iodine) can reduce the level of oral micro- semicritical items. If the item cannot toler- organisms in aerosols and spatter generated ate these procedures then, at a minimum, during routine dental procedures and can protect with an FDA-cleared barrier and decrease the number of microorganisms intro- clean and disinfect with an EPA-registered duced in the patient’s bloodstream during inva- hospital disinfectant with intermediate-level sive dental procedures (391–399), the scientific (i.e., tuberculocidal claim) activity, between evidence is inconclusive that using these rinses patients. Consult with the manufacturer for prevents clinical infections among DHCP or methods of disinfection and sterilization of patients (see discussion, Preprocedural Mouth digital radiology sensors and for protection Rinses) (Unresolved issue). of associated computer hardware (IB) (243). F. Oral Surgical Procedures C. Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications 1. The following apply when performing oral sur- 1. Do not administer medication from a syringe to gical procedures: multiple patients, even if the needle on the a. Perform surgical hand antisepsis by using an syringe is changed (IA) (378). antimicrobial product (e.g., antimicrobial 2. Use single-dose vials for parenteral medications soap and water, or soap and water followed when possible (II) (376,377). by alcohol-based hand scrub with persistent 3. Do not combine the leftover contents of single- activity) before donning sterile surgeon’s use vials for later use (IA) (376,377). gloves (IB) (127–132,137). 4. The following apply if multidose vials are used: b. Use sterile surgeon’s gloves (IB) (2,7,121, a. Cleanse the access diaphragm with 70% 123,137). alcohol before inserting a device into the vial c. Use sterile saline or sterile water as a cool- (IA) (380,381). ant/irrigatant when performing oral surgi- b. Use a sterile device to access a multiple-dose cal procedures. Use devices specifically vial and avoid touching the access diaphragm. designed for delivering sterile irrigating flu- Both the needle and syringe used to access ids (e.g., bulb syringe, single-use disposable the multidose vial should be sterile. Do not products, and sterilizable tubing) (IB) reuse a syringe even if the needle is changed (2,121). (IA) (380,381). G. Handling of Biopsy Specimens c. Keep multidose vials away from the imme- 1. During transport, place biopsy specimens in a diate patient treatment area to prevent inad- sturdy, leakproof container labeled with the bio- vertent contamination by spray or spatter hazard symbol (IC) (2,13,14). (II). 2. If a biopsy specimen container is visibly con- d. Discard the multidose vial if sterility is com- taminated, clean and disinfect the outside of a promised (IA) (380,381). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 47 container or place it in an impervious bag 1. No recommendation is offered regarding prac- labeled with the biohazard symbol, (IC) (2,13). tices to reduce DHCP exposure to laser plumes/ H. Handling of Extracted Teeth surgical smoke when using lasers in dental prac- 1. Dispose of extracted teeth as regulated medical tice. Practices to reduce HCP exposure to laser waste unless returned to the patient (IC) (13,14). plumes/surgical smoke have been suggested, 2. Do not dispose of extracted teeth containing including use of a) standard precautions (e.g., amalgam in regulated medical waste intended high-filtration surgical masks and possibly full for incineration (II). face shields) (437); b) central room suction units 3. Clean and place extracted teeth in a leakproof with in-line filters to collect particulate matter container, labeled with a biohazard symbol, and from minimal plumes; and c) dedicated maintain hydration for transport to educational mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high- institutions or a dental laboratory (IC) (13,14). efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts 4. Heat-sterilize teeth that do not contain amal- of laser-plume particles. The effect of the expo- gam before they are used for educational pur- sure (e.g., disease transmission or adverse respi- poses (IB) (403,405,406). ratory effects) on DHCP from dental I. Dental Laboratory applications of lasers has not been adequately 1. Use PPE when handling items received in the evaluated (see previous discussion, Laser/ laboratory until they have been decontaminated Electrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke) (IA, IC) (2,7,11,13,113). (Unresolved issue). 2. Before they are handled in the laboratory, clean, K. Mycobacterium tuberculosis disinfect, and rinse all dental prostheses and 1. General Recommendations prosthodontic materials (e.g., impressions, bite a. Educate all DHCP regarding the recogni- registrations, occlusal rims, and extracted teeth) tion of signs, symptoms, and transmission by using an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant of TB (IB) (20,21). having at least an intermediate-level (i.e., tuber- b. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by culocidal claim) activity (IB) (2,249,252,407). using a two-step test, for all DHCP who 3. Consult with manufacturers regarding the sta- might have contact with persons with sus- bility of specific materials (e.g., impression pected or confirmed active TB, regardless of materials) relative to disinfection procedures (II). the risk classification of the setting (IB) (20). 4. Include specific information regarding disinfec- c. Assess each patient for a history of TB as well tion techniques used (e.g., solution used and as symptoms indicative of TB and document duration), when laboratory cases are sent off- on the medical history form (IB) (20,21). site and on their return (II) (2,407,409). d. Follow CDC recommendations for 1) 5. Clean and heat-sterilize heat-tolerant items used developing, maintaining, and implementing in the mouth (e.g., metal impression trays and a written TB infection-control plan; 2) man- face-bow forks) (IB) (2,407). aging a patient with suspected or active TB; 6. Follow manufacturers’ instructions for cleaning 3) completing a community risk-assessment and sterilizing or disinfecting items that become to guide employee TSTs and follow-up; and contaminated but do not normally contact the 4) managing DHCP with TB disease (IB) patient (e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, (2,21). articulators, case pans, and lathes). If manufac- 2. The following apply for patients known or sus- turer instructions are unavailable, clean and heat- pected to have active TB: sterilize heat-tolerant items or clean and disinfect a. Evaluate the patient away from other patients with an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with and DHCP. When not being evaluated, the low- (HIV, HBV effectiveness claim) to inter- patient should wear a surgical mask or be mediate-level (tuberculocidal claim) activity, instructed to cover mouth and nose when depending on the degree of contamination (II). coughing or sneezing (IB) (20,21). J. Laser/Electrosurgery Plumes/Surgical Smoke b. Defer elective dental treatment until the patient is noninfectious (IB) (20,21). 48 MMWR December 19, 2003 c. Refer patients requiring urgent dental treat- CDC, NIOSH ment to a previously identified facility with http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/homepage.html TB engineering controls and a respiratory CDC Recommends, Prevention Guidelines System protection program (IB) (20,21). http://www.phppo.cdc.gov/cdcRecommends/AdvSearchV.asp L. Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) and Other Prion EPA, Antimicrobial Chemicals Diseases http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/chemregindex.htm 1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of FDA special precautions in addition to standard pre- http://www.fda.gov cautions when treating known CJD or vCJD Immunization Action Coalition patients. Potential infectivity of oral tissues in http://www.immunize.org/acip CJD or vCJD patients is an unresolved issue. Infectious Diseases Society of America Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of spo- http://www.idsociety.org/PG/toc.htm radic CJD transmission during dental and oral OSHA, Dentistry, Bloodborne Pathogens surgical procedures is low to nil. Until additional http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html information exists regarding the transmissibility http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/bloodbornepathogens/index.html of CJD or vCJD during dental procedures, spe- Organization for Safety and Asepsis Procedures cial precautions in addition to standard precau- http://www.osap.org tions might be indicated when treating known Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc., CJD or vCJD patients; a list of such precau- Position Papers tions is provided for consideration without rec- http://www.shea-online.org/PositionPapers.html ommendation (see Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Other Prion Diseases) (Unresolved issue). Acknowledgement M.Program Evaluation The Division of Oral Health thanks the working group as well as 1. Establish routine evaluation of the infection- CDC and other federal and external reviewers for their efforts in control program, including evaluation of per- developing and reviewing drafts of this report and acknowledges that all opinions of the reviewers might not be reflected in all of the formance indicators, at an established frequency recommendations. (II) (470-471). References 1.CDC. Recommended infection-control practices for dentistry. MMWR Infection-Control Internet Resources 1986;35:237–42. 2.CDC. Recommended infection-control practices for dentistry, 1993. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices MMWR 1993;42(No. RR-8). http://www.cdc.gov/nip/ACIP/default.htm 3.US Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2001. American Dental Association Washington, DC: US Census Bureau, 2001. Available at http://www. http://www.ada.org census.gov/prod/www/statistical-abstract-02.html. American Institute of Architects Academy of Architec- 4.Health Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Pro- fessions. United States health workforce personnel factbook. Rockville, ture for Health MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources http://www.aahaia.org and Services Administration, 2000. American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, Air-condi- 5.Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, Shapiro CN, tioning Engineers Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Com- http://www.ashrae.org mittee. Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289–354. 6.Greene VW. Microbiological contamination control in hospitals. Epidemiology, Inc. 1. Perspectives. Hospitals 1969;43:78–88. http://www.apic.org/resc/guidlist.cfm 7.CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion CDC, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/hip human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne CDC, Division of Oral Health, Infection Control pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR 1988;38:377–382, 387–8. http://www.cdc.gov/OralHealth/infectioncontrol/index.htm CDC, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 49 8.CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immuno- 29.Zaza S, Reeder JM, Charles LE, Jarvis WR. Latex sensitivity among deficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety perioperative nurses. AORN J 1994;60:806–12. workers: a response to P.L. 100-607 The Health Omnibus Programs 30.Hunt LW, Fransway AF, Reed CE, et al. An epidemic of occupational Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 1989;38(suppl No. 6S). allergy to latex involving health care workers. J Occup Environ Med 9.Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing and hospital 1995;37:1204–9. environmental control, 1985. Infect Control 1986;7:231–43. 31.American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. The dental 10.CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health- team and latex hypersensitivity. J Am Dent Assoc 1999;130:257–64. care settings. MMWR 1987;36(suppl No. 2S). 32.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 11.Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Alert: preventing allergic reactions to natural rubber latex in the work- Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp place. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Ser- Epidemiol 1996;17:53–80. vices, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational 12.Chiarello LA, Bartley J. Prevention of blood exposure in healthcare Safety and Health, 1997. personnel. Seminars in Infection Control 2001;1:30–43. 33.Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA. Personal protective equipment and bar- 13.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- rier techniques. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Prac- tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne tical infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries; final rule. Federal Wilkins, 1996:136–145. Register 2001;66:5317–25. As amended from and includes 29 CFR 34.US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Secre- Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens; tary, Office for Civil Rights. 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164. Standards for final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64174–82. Available at http://www. privacy of individually identifiable health information; final rule. Fed- osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html. eral Register 2000;65:82462–829. 14.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- 35.Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Access to medical tration. OSHA instruction: enforcement procedures for the occupa- and exposure records. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, tional exposure to bloodborne pathogens. Washington, DC: US Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2001. OSHA publi- Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administra- cation no. 3110. tion, 2001; directive no. CPL 2-2.69. 36.Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among 15.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- health-care workers. In: Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical tration. 29 CFR 1910.1200. Hazard communication. Federal Regis- practice. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, 1993:295–307. ter 1994;59:17479. 37.Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and 16.Gershon RR, Karkashian CD, Grosch JW, et al. Hospital safety cli- management of blood-borne infections in health care workers. Clin mate and its relationship with safe work practices and workplace expo- Microbiol Rev 2000;13:385–407. sure incidents. Am J Infect Control 2000;28:211–21. 38.Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitis-B-surface-antigen- 17.CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the positive inoculations: use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Hos- Intern Med 1982;97:367–9. pital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). 39.Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B: aspects of envi- MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18). ronmental control. Health Lab Sci 1977;14:235–52. 18.Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology. APIC 40.Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB. position paper: immunization. Am J Infect Control 1999;27:52–3. Nonparenteral serum hepatitis: report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972; 19.CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the manage- 220:963–6. ment of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and recommen- 41.Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis: an dations for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-11). occupational hazard to surgeons. JAMA 1973;223:395–400. 20.CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of Mycobacterium 42.Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in tuberculosis in health-care facilities, 1994. MMWR 1994;43(No. RR-13). medical and health care personnel. Br Med J 1982;284:324–6. 21.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Bolyard EA, Simone PM, Mullan RJ, 43.Chaudhuri AK, Follett EA. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and Marianos DW. TB infection control recommendations from the CDC, health care personnel [Letter]. Br Med J 1982;284:1408. 1994: considerations for dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:593–9. 44.Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard 22.Herwaldt LA, Pottinger JM, Carter CD, Barr BA, Miller ED. Expo- JE. Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one week sure workups. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:850–71. [Letter]. Lancet 1981;1:550–1. 23.Nash KD. How infection control procedures are affecting dental prac- 45.Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus tice today. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:67–73. [Review]. Semin Liver Dis 1981;1:27–32. 24.Berky ZT, Luciano WJ, James WD. Latex glove allergy: a survey of the 46.Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. Hepatitis-B antigen on US Army Dental Corps. JAMA 1992;268:2695–7. environmental surfaces [Letter]. Lancet 1973;2:1455. 25.Bubak ME, Reed CE, Fransway AF, et al. Allergic reactions to latex 47.Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmis- among health-care workers. Mayo Clin Proc 1992;67:1075–9. sion of hepatitis B virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis 26.Fisher AA. Allergic contact reactions in health personnel. J Allergy Clin 1979;140:513–6. Immunol 1992;90:729–38. 48.Hennekens CH. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis: an outbreak among 27.Smart ER, Macleod RI, Lawrence CM. Allergic reactions to rubber gloves hospital personnel. JAMA 1973;225:407–8. in dental patients: report of three cases. Br Dent J 1992;172:445–7. 49.Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE. 28.Yassin MS, Lierl MB, Fischer TJ, O’Brien K, Cross J, Steinmetz C. Hemodialysis-associated hepatitis. JAMA 1973;225:384–9. Latex allergy in hospital employees. Ann Allergy 1994;72:245–9. 50 MMWR December 19, 2003 50.Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysis-associated 73.Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr, Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy hepatitis: a report of an epidemic with further evidence on mecha- L, Kerley LM. Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers: risk nisms of transmission. Am J Epidemiol 1976;104:563–70. of exposure and infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994; 51.Shapiro CN. Occupational risk of infection with hepatitis B and hepa- 15:745–50. titis C virus. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1047–56. 74.Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in 52.Cleveland JL, Siew C, Lockwood SA, Gruninger SE, Gooch BF, Shapiro medical personnel after needlestick accident. Hepatology 1992;16: CN. Hepatitis B vaccination and infection among U.S. dentists, 1983– 1109–14. 1992. J Am Dent Assoc 1996;127:1385–90. 75.Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G. 53.CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human Transmission of hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during J Infect Dis 1993;25:270–1. exposure-prone invasive procedures. MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-8). 76.Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G. The risk of occupational human 54.Chamberland ME. HIV transmission from health care worker to immunodeficiency virus in health care workers: Italian Multicenter patient: what is the risk [Letter]? Ann Intern Med 1992;116:871–3. Study, The Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV Infec- 55.Robert LM, Chamberland ME, Cleveland JL, et al. Investigation of tion. Arch Intern Med 1993;153:1451–8. patients of health care workers infected with HIV: the Centers for Disease 77.Beltrami EM, Kozak A, Williams IT, et al. Transmission of HIV and Control and Prevention database. Ann Intern Med 1995;122:653–7. hepatitis C virus from a nursing home patient to a health care worker. 56.CDC. Investigations of persons treated by HIV-infected health-care Am J Infec Control. 2003; 31:168–75. workers—United States. MMWR 1993;42:329–331, 337. 78.Cooper BW, Krusell A, Tilton RC, Goodwin R, Levitz RE. 57.Siew C, Chang SB, Gruninger SE, Verrusio AC, Neidle EA. Self- Seroprevalence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in high-risk hospital reported percutaneous injuries in dentists: implications for HBV, HIV, personnel. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992;13:82–5. transmission risk. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:36–44. 79.Panlilio AL, Shapiro CN, Schable CA, et al. Serosurvey of human 58.Ahtone J, Goodman RA. Hepatitis B and dental personnel: transmission immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infec- to patients and prevention issues. J Am Dent Assoc 1983;106:219–22. tion among hospital-based surgeons. Serosurvey Study Group. J Am 59.Hadler SC, Sorley DL, Acree KH, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis B in Coll Surg 1995;180:16–24. a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1981;95:133–8. 80.Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for 60.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: hepatitis B among dental hepatitis C virus infection among health care personnel in a commu- patients—Indiana. MMWR 1985;34:73–5. nity hospital. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:196–200. 61.Levin ML, Maddrey WC, Wands JR, Mendeloff AL. Hepatitis B trans- 81.Shapiro CN, Tokars JI, Chamberland ME, American Academy of mission by dentists. JAMA 1974;228:1139–40. Orthopaedic Surgeons Serosurvey Study Committee. Use of the 62.Rimland D, Parkin WE, Miller GB Jr, Schrack WD. Hepatitis B out- hepatitis-B vaccine and infection with hepatitis B and C among break traced to an oral surgeon. N Engl J Med 1977;296:953–8. orthopaedic surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1996;78:1791–800. 63.Goodwin D, Fannin SL, McCracken BB. An oral surgeon-related 82.Gerberding JL. Incidence and prevalence of human immunodeficiency hepatitis-B outbreak. California Morbidity 1976;14:1. virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and cytomegalovirus among 64.Reingold AL, Kane MA, Murphy BL, Checko P, Francis DP, Maynard health care personnel at risk for blood exposure: final report from a JE. Transmission of hepatitis B by an oral surgeon. J Infect Dis 1982; longitudinal study. J Infect Dis 1994;170:1410–7. 145:262–8. 83.Klein RS, Freeman K, Taylor PE, Stevens CE. Occupational risk for 65.Goodman RA, Ahtone JL, Finton RJ. Hepatitis B transmission from hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists. Lancet dental personnel to patients: unfinished business. Ann Intern Med 1991;338:1539–42. 1982;96:119. 84.Thomas DL, Gruninger SE, Siew C, Joy ED, Quinn TC. Occupa- 66.Shaw FE Jr, Barrett CL, Hamm R, et al. Lethal outbreak of hepatitis B tional risk of hepatitis C infections among general dentists and oral in a dental practice. JAMA 1986;255:3260–4. surgeons in North America. Am J Med 1996;100:41–5. 67.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: outbreak of hepatitis B associ- 85.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Shearer BG, Lyerla RL. Risk and prevention ated with an oral surgeon—New Hampshire. MMWR 1987;36:132–3. of hepatitis C virus infection: implications for dentistry. J Am Dent 68.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- Assoc 1999;130:641–7. tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne 86.Gruninger SE, Siew C, Azzolin KL, Meyer DM. Update of hepatitis C pathogens; final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64004–182. infection among dental professionals [Abstract 1825]. J Dent Res 69.CDC. Hepatitis B virus: a comprehensive strategy for eliminating trans- 2001;80:264. mission in the United States through universal childhood vaccination: 87.Esteban JI, Gomez J, Martell M, et al. Transmission of hepatitis C recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Commit- virus by a cardiac surgeon. N Engl J Med 1996;334:555–60. tee (ACIP). MMWR 1991;40(No. RR-13). 88.Duckworth GJ, Heptonstall J, Aitken C. Transmission of hepatitis C 70.Polish LB, Gallagher M, Fields HA, Hadler SC. Delta hepatitis: virus from a surgeon to a patient: the Incident Control Team. Commun molecular biology and clinical and epidemiological features. Clin Dis Public Health 1999;2:188–92. Microbiol Rev 1993;6:211–29. 89.Ross RS, Viazov S, Gross T, Hofmann F, Seipp HM, Roggendorf M. 71.Alter MJ. The epidemiology of acute and chronic hepatitis C. Clin Brief report: transmission of hepatitis C virus from a patient to an anes- Liver Dis 1997;1:559–68. thesiology assistant to five patients. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1851–4. 72.Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion 90.Cody SH, Nainan OV, Garfein RS, et al. Hepatitis C virus transmis- after occupational exposures in health care workers: Italian Study Group sion from an anesthesiologist to a patient. Arch Intern Med 2002; on Occupational Risk of HIV and Other Bloodborne Infections. Am J 162:345–50. Infect Control 1995;23:273–7. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 51 91.Do AN, Ciesielski CA, Metler RP, Hammett TA, Li J, Fleming PL. 109.US Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety Adminis- Occupationally acquired human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) tration. 29 CFR Part 1910. Occupational exposure to bloodborne infection: national case surveillance data during 20 years of the HIV pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries, final rule. Federal epidemic in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol Register 2001;66:5325. 2003;24:86–96. 110.CDC. Evaluation of safety devices for preventing percutaneous inju- 92.Ciesielski C, Marianos D, Ou CY, et al. Transmission of human ries among health-care workers during phlebotomy procedures— immunodeficiency virus in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1992; Minneapolis-St. Paul, New York City, and San Francisco, 1993–1995. 116:798–805. MMWR 1997;46:21–5. 93.CDC. Investigations of patients who have been treated by HIV- 111.CDC. Evaluation of blunt suture needles in preventing percutaneous infected health-care workers—United States. MMWR 1993;42: injuries among health-care workers during gynecologic surgical proce- 329–31, 337. dures—New York City, March 1993–June 1994. MMWR 1997; 94.Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infec- 46:25–9. tion in healthcare workers: an overview. Am J Med 1997;102(5B):9–15. 112.Mendelson MH, Lin-Chen BY, Solomon R, Bailey E, Kogan G, 95.Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al, Centers for Disease Con- Goldbold J. Evaluation of a safety resheathable winged steel needle for trol and Prevention Needlestick Surveillance Group. A case-control prevention of percutaneous injuries associated with intravascular- study of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after percutaneous access procedures among healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp exposure. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1485–90. Epidemiol 2003;24:105–12. 96.Beltrami EM. The risk and prevention of occupational human immuno- 113.CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health- deficiency virus infection. Seminars in Infection Control 2001;1:2–18. care settings. MMWR 1987;36(No. S2). 97.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 114.CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immuno- alert: Preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincin- deficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety nati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public workers: a response to P.L. 100-607. The Health Omnibus Programs Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 1989;38(No. S6). Health, 1999. 115.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Select- 98.Klein RS, Phelan JA, Freeman K, et al. Low occupational risk of ing, evaluating, and using sharps disposal containers. Cincinnati, OH: human immunodeficiency virus infection among dental professionals. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser- N Engl J Med 1988;318:86–90. vice, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 99.Gruninger SE, Siew C, Chang SB, et al. Human immunodeficiency 1998. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 97-111. virus type I: infection among dentists. J Am Dent Assoc 1992;123:59–64. 116.CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupa- 100.Siew C, Gruninger SE, Miaw CL, Neidle EA. Percutaneous injuries in tional exposure to human immunodeficiency virus, including consid- practicing dentists: a propective study using a 20-day diary. J Am Dent erations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR 1990;39 Assoc 1995;126:1227–34. (No. RR-1). 101.Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA, Gooch BF, et al. Percutaneous injuries in 117.CDC. Notice to readers update: provisional Public Health Service rec- dentistry: an observational study. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:745–51. ommendations for chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to 102.Ramos-Gomez F, Ellison J, Greenspan D, Bird W, Lowe S, Gerberding HIV. MMWR 1996;45:468–72. JL. Accidental exposures to blood and body fluids among health care 118.CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health- workers in dental teaching clinics: a prospective study. J Am Dent Assoc care worker exposures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure 1997;128:1253–61. prophylaxis. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-7). 103.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Lockwood SA. Occupational blood exposure 119.CDC. Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C in dentistry: a decade in review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997; virus (HCV) infection and HCV-related chronic disease. MMWR 18:717–21. 1998;47(No. RR-19). 104.Gooch BF, Siew C, Cleveland JL, Gruninger SE, Lockwood SA, Joy 120.Steere AC, Mallison GF. Handwashing practices for the prevention of ED. Occupational blood exposure and HIV infection among oral and nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 1975;83:683–90. maxillofacial surgeons. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 121.Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical wound infec- Endod 1998;85:128–34. tions, 1985. Supersedes guideline for prevention of surgical wound 105.Gooch BF, Cardo DM, Marcus R, et al. Percutaneous exposures to infections published in 1982. (Originally published in November HIV–infected blood among dental workers enrolled in the ). Revised. Infect Control 1986;7:193–200. needlestick study. J Am Dent Assoc 1995;126:1237–42. 122.Larson EL. APIC guideline for hand washing and hand antisepsis in 106.Younai FS, Murphy DC, Kotelchuck D. Occupational exposures to health-care settings. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:251–69. blood in a dental teaching environment: results of a ten-year surveil- 123.CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings: recommen- lance study. J Dent Educ 2001;65:436–8. dations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Com- 107.Carlton JE, Dodson TB, Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA. Percutaneous mittee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task injuries during oral and maxillofacial surgery procedures. J Oral Force. MMWR 2002;51(No. RR-16). Maxillofac Surg 1997;55:553–6. 124.Casewell M, Phillips I. Hands as route of transmission for Klebsiella 108.Harte J, Davis R, Plamondon T, Richardson B. The influence of den- species. Br Med J 1977;2:1315–7. tal unit design on percutaneous injury. J Am Dent Assoc 1998; 125.Larson EL, Early E, Cloonan P, Sugrue S, Parides M. An organiza- 129:1725–31. tional climate intervention associated with increased handwashing and decreased nosocomial infections. Behav Med 2000;26:14–22. 52 MMWR December 19, 2003 126.Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital- 147.Larson E, Killien M. Factors influencing handwashing behavior of wide programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene. Lancet patient care personnel. Am J Infect Control 1982;10:93–9. 2000;356:1307–12. 148.Zimakoff J, Kjelsberg AB, Larson SO, Holstein B. A multicenter ques- 127.Price PB. New studies in surgical bacteriology and surgical technique. tionnaire investigation of attitudes toward hand hygiene, assessed by JAMA 1938;111:1993–6. the staff in fifteen hospitals in Denmark and Norway. Am J Infec Con- 128.Dewar NE, Gravens DL. Effectiveness of septisol antiseptic foam as a trol 1992;20:58–64. surgical scrub agent. Appl Microbiol 1973;26:544–9. 149.Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens blood- 129.Lowbury EJ, Lilly HA. Disinfection of the hands of surgeons and nurses. stream infections from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialy- Br Med J 1960;1445–50. sis center. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1491–7. 130.Rotter M. Hand washing and hand disinfection. In: Mayhall CG, ed. 150.Archibald LK, Corl A, Shah B, et al. Serratia marcescens outbreak asso- Hospital epidemiology and infection control. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: ciated with extrinsic contamination of 1% chlorxylenol soap. Infect Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:1339–55. Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:704–9. 131.Widmer AF. Replace hand washing with use of a waterless alcohol hand 151.Larson EL, Norton Hughes CA, Pyrak JD, Sparks SM, Cagatay EU, rub? Clin Infect Dis 2000;31:136–43. Bartkus JM. Changes in bacterial flora associated with skin damage on 132.Larson EL, Butz AM, Gullette DL, Laughon BA. Alcohol for surgical hands of health care personnel. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:513–21. scrubbing? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1990;11:139–43. 152.Ojajärvi J, Mäkelä P, Rantasalo I. Failure of hand disinfection with 133.Faoagali J, Fong J, George N, Mahoney P, O’Rouke V. Comparison of frequent hand washing: a need for prolonged field studies. J Hyg (Lond) the immediate, residual, and cumulative antibacterial effects of 1977;79:107–19. Novaderm R,* Novascrub R,* Betadine Surgical Scrub, Hibiclens, and 153.Berndt U, Wigger-Alberti W, Gabard B, Elsner P. Efficacy of a barrier liquid soap. Am J Infect Control 1995;23:337–43. cream and its vehicle as protective measures against occupational irri- 134.Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended prac- tant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 2000;42:77–80. tices for sterilization in the practice setting. In: Fogg D, Parker N, 154.McCormick RD, Buchman TL, Maki DG. Double-blind, randomized Shevlin D, eds. 2002 standards, recommended practices, and guide- trial of scheduled use of a novel barrier cream and an oil-containing lines. Denver, CO: AORN, 2002:333–42. lotion for protecting the hands of health care workers. Am J Infect 135.US Department Of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Control 2000;28:302–10. Administration. Tentative final monograph for healthcare antiseptic 155.Larson E, Anderson JK, Baxendale L, Bobo L. Effects of a protective drug products; proposed rule. Federal Register 1994;59:31441–52. foam on scrubbing and gloving. Am J Infect Control 1993;21:297–301. 136.Larson E. A causal link between handwashing and risk of infection? 156.McGinley KJ, Larson EL, Leyden JJ. Composition and density of Examination of the evidence. Infection Control.1988;9:28–36. microflora in the subungual space of the hand. J Clin Microbiol 137.Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR, Hospital 1988;26:950–3. Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for pre- 157Pottinger J, Burns S, Manske C. Bacterial carriage by artificial versus vention of surgical site infection, 1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol natural nails. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:340–4. 1999;20:250–78. 158.McNeil SA, Foster CL, Hedderwick SA, Kauffman CA. Effect of hand 138.Doebbeling BN, Pfaller MA, Houston AK, Wenzel RP. Removal of cleansing with antimicrobial soap or alcohol-based gel on microbial nosocomial pathogens from the contaminated glove. Ann Intern Med colonization of artificial fingernails worn by health care workers. Clin 1988;109:394–8. Infect Dis 2001;32:367–72. 139.Kabara JJ, Brady MB. Contamination of bar soaps under “in-use” con- 159.Rubin DM. Prosthetic fingernails in the OR: a research study. AORN ditions. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1984;5:1–14. J 1988;47:944–5. 140.Ojajärvi J. The importance of soap selection for routine hand hygiene 160.Hedderwick SA, McNeil SA, Lyons MJ, Kauffman CA. Pathogenic in hospital. J Hyg (Lond) 1981;86:275–83. organisms associated with artificial fingernails worn by healthcare work- 141.Larson E, Leyden JJ, McGinley KJ, Grove GL, Talbot GH. Physiologic ers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000;21:505–9. and microbiologic changes in skin related to frequent handwashing. 161.Passaro DJ, Waring L, Armstrong R, et al. Postoperative Serratia marcescens Infect Control 1986;7:59–63. wound infections traced to an out-of-hospital source. J Infect Dis 142.Larson E. Handwashing: it’s essential—even when you use gloves. Am 1997;175:992–5. J Nurs 1989;89:934–9. 162.Foca M, Jakob K, Whittier S, et al. Endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa 143.Field EA, McGowan P, Pearce PK, Martin MV. Rings and watches: infection in a neonatal intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2000; should they be removed prior to operative dental procedures? J Dent 343:695–700. 1996;24:65–9. 163.Parry MF, Grant B, Yukna M, et al. Candida osteomyelitis and diskitis 144.Hobson DW, Woller W, Anderson L, Guthery E. Development and after spinal surgery: an outbreak that implicates artificial nail use. Clin evaluation of a new alcohol-based surgical hand scrub formulation with Infect Dis 2001;32:352–7. persistent antimicrobial characteristics and brushless application. Am 164.Moolenaar RL, Crutcher M, San Joaquin VH, et al. A prolonged out- J Infect Control 1998;26:507–12. break of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a neonatal intensive care unit: did 145.Mulberry G, Snyder AT, Heilman J, Pyrek J, Stahl J. Evaluation of a staff fingernails play a role in disease transmission? Infect Control Hosp waterless, scrubless chlorhexidine gluconate/ethanol surgical scrub for Epidemiol 2000;21:80–5. antimicrobial efficacy. Am J Infect Control 2001;29:377–82. 165.Baumgardner CA, Maragos CS, Walz J, Larson E. Effects of nail polish 146.Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended prac- on microbial growth of fingernails: dispelling sacred cows. AORN J tices for surgical hand scrubs. In: Fogg D, Parker N, eds. 2003 stan- 1993;58:84–8. dards, recommended practices, and guidelines. Denver, CO: AORN, Inc., 2003:277–80. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 53 166.Wynd CA, Samstag DE, Lapp AM. Bacterial carriage on the finger- 185.Avery CM, Hjort A, Walsh S, Johnson PA. Glove perforation during nails of OR nurses. AORN J 1994;60:796, 799–805. surgical extraction of wisdom teeth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 167.Lowbury EJ. Aseptic methods in the operating suite. Lancet Oral Radiol Endod 1998;86:23–5. 1968;1:705–9. 186.Otis LL, Cottone JA. Prevalence of perforations in disposable latex 168.Hoffman PN, Cooke EM, McCarville MR, Emmerson AM. Micro- gloves during routine dental treatment. J Am Dent Assoc 1989; organisms isolated from skin under wedding rings worn by hospital 118:321–4. staff. Br Med J 1985;290:206–7. 187.Kotilainen HR, Brinker JP, Avato JL, Gantz NM. Latex and vinyl 169.Jacobson G, Thiele JE, McCune JH, Farrell LD. Handwashing: ring- examination gloves. Quality control procedures and implications for wearing and number of microorganisms. Nurs Res 1985;34:186–8. health care workers. Arch Intern Med 1989;149:2749–53. 170.Trick WE, Vernon MO, Hayes RA, et al. Impact of ring wearing on 188.Food and Drug Administration. Glove powder report. Rockville, MD: hand contamination and comparison of hand hygiene agents in a hos- US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug pital. Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:1383–90. Administration, 1997. Available at http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/glvpwd.html. 171.Salisbury DM, Hutfilz P, Treen LM, Bollin GE, Gautam S. The effect 189.Morgan DJ, Adams D. Permeability studies on protective gloves used of rings on microbial load of health care workers’ hands. Am J Infec in dental practice. Br Dent J 1989;166:11–3. Control 1997;25:24–7. 190.Albin MS, Bunegin L, Duke ES, Ritter RR, Page CP. Anatomy of a 172.Cochran MA, Miller CH, Sheldrake MS. The efficacy of the rubber defective barrier: sequential glove leak detection in a surgical and den- dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms during dental treat- tal environment. Crit Care Med 1992;20:170–84. ment. J Am Dent Assoc 1989;119:141–4. 191.Merchant VA, Molinari JA, Pickett T. Microbial penetration of gloves 173.Miller CH, Palenik DJ. Aseptic techniques [Chapter 10]. In: Miller following usage in routine dental procedures. Am J Dent 1992;5:95–6. CH, Palenik DJ, eds. Infection control and management of hazardous 192.Pitten FA, Herdemann G, Kramer A. The integrity of latex gloves in materials for the dental team. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 1998. clinical dental practice. Infection 2000;28:388–92. 174.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. TB res- 193.Jamal A, Wilkinson S. The mechanical and microbiological integrity piratory protection program in health care facilities: administrator’s of surgical gloves. ANZ J Surg 2003;73:140–3. guide. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Ser- 194.Korniewicz DM, El-Masri MM, Broyles JM, Martin CD, O’Connell vices, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational KP. A laboratory-based study to assess the performance of surgical gloves. Safety and Health, 1999. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 99-143. AORN J 2003;77:772–9. 175.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- 195.Schwimmer A, Massoumi M, Barr CE. Efficacy of double gloving to tration. OSHA 29 CFR 1910.139. Respiratory protection for prevent inner glove perforation during outpatient oral surgical proce- M. tuberculosis. Federal Register 1998;49:442–9. dures. J Am Dent Assoc 1994;125:196–8. 176.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 196.Patton LL, Campbell TL, Evers SP. Prevalence of glove perforations dur- guide to the selection and use of particulate respirators certified under ing double-gloving for dental procedures. Gen Dent 1995;43:22–6. 42 CFR 84. Cincinnati, OH: US Department of Health and Human 197.Gerberding JL, Littell C, Tarkington A, Brown A, Schecter WP. Risk Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupa- of exposure of surgical personnel to patients’ blood during surgery at tional Safety and Health, 1996. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 96- San Francisco General Hospital. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1788–93. 101. 198.Klein RC, Party E, Gershey EL. Virus penetration of examination gloves. 177.DeGroot-Kosolcharoen J, Jones JM. Permeability of latex and vinyl Biotechniques 1990;9:196–9. gloves to water and blood. Am J Infect Control 1989;17:196–201. 199.Mellstrom GA, Lindberg M, Boman A. Permeation and destructive 178.Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Butz A, Larson E. Integrity of vinyl effects of disinfectants on protective gloves. Contact Dermatitis and latex procedure gloves. Nurs Res 1989;38:144–6. 1992;26:163–70. 179.Olsen RJ, Lynch P, Coyle MB, Cummings J, Bokete T, Stamm WE. 200.Jordan SL, Stowers MF, Trawick EG, Theis AB. Glutaraldehyde perme- Examination gloves as barriers to hand contamination in clinical prac- ation: choosing the proper glove. Am J Infect Control 1996;24:67–9. tice. JAMA 1993;270:350–3. 201.Cappuccio WR, Lees PS, Breysse PN, Margolick JB. Evaluation of 180.Murray CA, Burke FJ, McHugh S. An assessment of the incidence of integrity of gloves used in a flow cytometry laboratory. Infect Control punctures in latex and non-latex dental examination gloves in routine Hosp Epidemiol 1997;18:423–5. clinical practice. Br Dent J 2001;190:377–80. 202.Monticello MV, Gaber DJ. Glove resistance to permeation by a 7.5% 181.Burke FJ, Baggett FJ, Lomax AM. Assessment of the risk of glove punc- hydrogen peroxide sterilizing and disinfecting solution. Am J Infec ture during oral surgery procedures. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Control 1999;27:364–6. Oral Radiol Endod 1996;82:18–21. 203.Baumann MA, Rath B, Fischer JH, Iffland R. The permeability of 182.Burke FJ, Wilson NH. The incidence of undiagnosed punctures in dental procedure and examination gloves by an alcohol based disinfec- non-sterile gloves. Br Dent J 1990;168:67–71. tant. Dent Mater 2000;16:139–44. 183.Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H. Perforation and 204.Ready MA, Schuster GS, Wilson JT, Hanes CM. Effects of dental proteinaceous contamination of dental gloves during prosthodontic medicaments on examination glove permeability. J Prosthet Dent treatments. Int J Prosthodont 1994;7:559–66. 1989;61:499–503. 184.Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H, Murata H. Perfora- 205.Richards JM, Sydiskis RJ, Davidson WM, Josell SD, Lavine DS. Per- tion of dental gloves during prosthodontic treatments as assessed by meability of latex gloves after contact with dental materials. Am the conductivity and water inflation tests. Int J Prosthodont J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 1993;104:224–9. 1996;9:362–6. 54 MMWR December 19, 2003 206.Andersson T, Bruze M, Bjorkner B. In vivo testing of the protection of 227.Siew C, Hamann C, Gruninger SE, Rodgers P, Sullivan KM. 2003.Type gloves against acrylates in dentin-bonding systems on patients with known I Latex Allergic Reactions among Dental Professionals, 1996–2001. contact allergy to acrylates. Contact Dermatitis 1999;41:254–9. Journal of Dental Research, 82 (Special Issue): #1718. 207.Reitz CD, Clark NP. The setting of vinyl polysiloxane and condensa- 228.Saary MJ, Kanani A, Alghadeer H, Holness DL, Tarlo SM. Changes in tion silicone putties when mixed with gloved hands. J Am Dent Assoc rates of natural rubber latex sensitivity among dental school students 1988;116:371–5. and staff members after changes in latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol 208.Kahn RL, Donovan TE, Chee WW. Interaction of gloves and rubber 2002;109:131–5. dam with a poly (vinyl siloxane) impression material: a screening test. 229.Hunt LW, Kelkar P, Reed CE, Yunginger JW. Management of occupa- Int J Prosthodont 1989;2:342–6. tional allergy to natural rubber latex in a medical center: the impor- 209.Matis BA, Valadez D, Valadez E. The effect of the use of dental gloves tance of quantitative latex allergen measurement and objective on mixing vinyl polysiloxane putties. J Prosthodont 1997;6:189–92. follow-up. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110(suppl 2):S96–106. 210.Wright JG, McGeer AJ, Chyatte D, Ransohoff DF. Mechanisms of 230.Turjanmaa K, Kanto M, Kautiainen H, Reunala T, Palosuo T. Long- glove tears and sharp injuries among surgical personnel. JAMA term outcome of 160 adult patients with natural rubber latex allergy. 1991;266:1668–71. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002; 110(suppl 2):S70–4. 211.Dodds RD, Guy PJ, Peacock AM, Duffy SR, Barker SG, Thomas MH. 231.Heilman DK, Jones RT, Swanson MC, Yunginger JW. A prospective, Surgical glove perforation. Br J Surg 1988;75:966–8. controlled study showing that rubber gloves are the major contributor 212.Adams D, Bagg J, Limaye M, Parsons K, Absi EG. A clinical evalua- to latex aeroallergen levels in the operating room. J Allergy Clin tion of glove washing and re-use in dental practice. J Hosp Infect Immunol 1996;98:325–30. 1992;20:153–62. 232.Baur X, Jager D. Airborne antigens from latex gloves. Lancet 1990; 213.Martin MV, Dunn HM, Field EA, et al. A physical and microbiological 335:912. evaluation of the re-use of non-sterile gloves. Br Dent J 1988;165:321–4. 233.Turjanmaa K, Reunala T, Alenius H, Brummer-Korvenkontio H, 214.US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Palosuo T. Allergens in latex surgical gloves and glove powder. Lancet Administration. 21 CFR Part 800. Medical devices; patient examina- 1990;336:1588. tion and surgeon’s gloves. Adulteration, final rule. Federal Register 234.Baur X, Chen Z, Allmers H. Can a threshold limit value for natural 1990;55:51254–8. rubber latex airborne allergens be defined? J Allergy Clin Immunol 215.Giglio JA, Roland RW, Laskin DM, Grenevicki L. The use of sterile 1998;101:24–7. versus nonsterile gloves during out-patient exodontia. Quintessence 235.Trape M, Schenck P, Warren A. Latex gloves use and symptoms in Int 1993;24:543–5. health care workers 1 year after implementaion of a policy restricting 216.Cheung LK, Chow LK, Tsang MH, Tung LK. An evaluation of com- the use of powdered gloves. Am J Infec Control 2000;28:352–8. plications following dental extractions using either sterile or clean gloves. 236.Allmers H, Brehler R, Chen Z, Raulf-Heimsoth M, Fels H, Baur X. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2001;30:550–4. Reduction of latex aeroallergens and latex-specific IgE antibodies in 217.Gani JS, Anseline PF, Bissett RL. Efficacy of double versus single glov- sensitized workers after removal of powdered natural rubber latex gloves ing in protecting the operating team. Aust N Z J Surg 1990;60:171–5. in a hospital. Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;102:841–6. 218.Short LJ, Bell DM. Risk of occupational infection with blood-borne 237.Tarlo SM, Sussman G, Contala A, Swanson MC. Control of airborne pathogens in operating and delivery room settings. Am J Infect Con- latex by use of powder-free latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol trol 1993;21:343–50. 1994;93:985–9. 219.Tokars JI, Culver DH, Mendelson MH, et al. Skin and mucous mem- 238.Swanson MC, Bubak ME, Hunt LW, Yunginger JW, Warner MA, Reed brane contacts with blood during surgical procedures: risk and preven- CE. Quantification of occupational latex aeroallergens in a medical tion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1995;16:703–11. center. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1994;94:445–551. 220.Tanner J, Parkinson H. Double gloving to reduce surgical cross- 239.Hermesch CB, Spackman GK, Dodge WW, Salazar A. Effect of infection (Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Library 2003;(Issue 2):1–32. powder-free latex examination glove use on airborne powder levels in a 221.Webb JM, Pentlow BD. Double gloving and surgical technique. Ann dental school clinic. J Dent Educ 1999;63:814–20. R Coll Surg Engl 1993;75:291–2. 240.Miller CH. Infection control strategies for the dental office [Chapter 222.Watts D, Tassler PL, Dellon AL. The effect of double gloving on cuta- 29]. In: Ciancio SG, ed. ADA guide to dental therapeutics. 2nd ed. neous sensibility, skin compliance and suture identification. Contemp Chicago, IL: ADA Publishing, 2000:543–58. Surg 1994;44:289–92. 241.Primeau MN, Adkinson NF Jr, Hamilton RG. Natural rubber phar- 223.Wilson SJ, Sellu D, Uy A, Jaffer MA. Subjective effects of double gloves maceutical vial closures release latex allergens that produce skin reac- on surgical performance. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 1996;78:20–2. tions. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:958–62. 224.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA: 242.Spaulding EH. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materi- medical glove guidance manual [Draft guidance]. Rockville, MD: als [Chapter 32]. In: Lawrence CA, Block SS, eds. Disinfection, steril- US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug ization and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1968: Administration, 1999. Available at http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/dsma/ 517–31. 135.html#_Toc458914315. 243.CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facili- 225.Dillard SF, Hefflin B, Kaczmarek RG, Petsonk EL, Gross TP. Health ties: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control effects associated with medical glove use. AORN J 2002;76:88–96. Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR (in press). 226.Hamann CP, Turjanmaa K, Rietschel R, et al. Natural rubber latex 244.CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care hypersensitivity: incidence and prevalence of type I allergy in the den- facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection tal professional. J Am Dent Assoc 1998;129:43–54. Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-10). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 55 245.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Parts 152, 156, and 260.Miller CH, Palenik CJ. Sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis in den- 158. Exemption of certain pesticide substances from federal insecti- tistry [Chapter 53]. In: Block SS, ed. 5th ed. Disinfection, steriliza- cide, fungicide, and rodenticide act requirements. Amended 1996. tion, and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Federal Register 1996;61:8876–9. Wilkins, 2001:1049–68. 246.Food and Drug Administration. Dental handpiece sterilization [Let- 261.Joslyn LJ. Sterilization by heat [Chapter 36]. In: Block SS, ed. 5th ed. ter]. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Disinfection, sterilization, and preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Food and Drug Administration, 1992. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:695–728. 247.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 262.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Chappell KJ. Patient injury from flash- can National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility sterilized instruments. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999;20:458. assurance in health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST46-2002. Arling- 263.Bond WW. Biological indicators for a liquid chemical sterilizer: a solu- ton, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumenta- tion to the instrument reprocessing problem? Infect Control Hosp tion, 2002. Epidemiol 1993;14:309–12. 248.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 264.Stingeni L, Lapomarda V, Lisi P. Occupational hand dermatitis in hos- can National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility pital environments. Contact Dermatitis 1995;33:172–6. assurance using table-top sterilizers in office-based, ambulatory-care 265.Ashdown BC, Stricof DD, May ML, Sherman SJ, Carmody RF. medical, surgical, and dental facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST40-1998. Hydrogen peroxide poisoning causing brain infarction: neuroimaging Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru- findings. Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:1653–5. mentation, 1998. 266.Ballantyne B. Toxicology of glutaraldehyde: review of studies and 249.Favero MS, Bond WW. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical human health effects. Danbury, CT: Union Carbide, 1995. material [Chapter 43]. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization and 267.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Glut- preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, araldehyde: occupational hazards in hospitals. Cincinnati, OH: US 2001:881–917. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 250.Parker HH 4th, Johnson RB. Effectiveness of ethylene oxide for steril- CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2001. ization of dental handpieces. J Dent 1995;23:113–5. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 2001-115. 251.Alfa MJ, Olson N, Degagne P, Hizon R. New low temperature steril- 268CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: symptoms of irritation asso- ization technologies: microbicidal activity and clinical efficacy [Chap- ciated with exposure to glutaraldehyde—Colorado. MMWR ter 9]. In: Rutala WA, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in 1987;36:190–1. health-care. Champlain, NY: Polyscience Publications, 1998:67–78. 269.Lehman PA, Franz TJ, Guin JD. Penetration of glutaraldehyde through 252.Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Clinical effectiveness of low-temperature glove material: tactylon versus natural rubber latex. Contact Dermati- sterilization technologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998; tis 1994;30:176–7. 19:798–804. 270.Hamann CP, Rodgers PA, Sullivan K. Allergic contact dermatitis in 253.Miller CH, Tan CM, Beiswanger MA, Gaines DJ, Setcos JC, Palenik dental professionals: effective diagnosis and treatment. J Am Dent Assoc CJ. Cleaning dental instruments: measuring the effectiveness of an 2003;134:185–94. instrument washer/disinfector. Am J Dent 2000;13:39–43. 271.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 254.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Chemi- can National Standards Institute. Safe use and handling of glutaralde- cal indicators—guidance for the selection, use, and interpretation of hyde-based products in health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST58-1996. results. AAMI Technical Information Report No. 25. Arlington, VA: Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru- Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1999. mentation, 1996. 255.Ninemeier J. Central service technical manual. 5th ed. Chicago, IL: 272.Fisher AA. Ethylene oxide dermatitis. Cutis 1984;34:20, 22, 24. International Association of Healthcare Central Service Materiel Man- 273.Jay WM, Swift TR, Hull DS. Possible relationship of ethylene oxide agement, 1998. exposure to cataract formation. Am J Ophthalmol 1982;93:727–32. 256.Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Choosing a sterilization wrap for surgical packs. 274.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- Infection Control Today 2000;4:64,70. tration. Review of the ethylene oxide standard. Federal Register 257.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 2000;65:35127–8. can National Standards Institute. Good hospital practice: steam steril- 275.Pratt LH, Smith DG, Thornton RH, Simmons JB, Depta BB, Johnson ization and sterility assurance. ANSI/AAMI ST46-1993. Arlington, VA: RB. The effectiveness of two sterilization methods when different Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1993. precleaning techniques are employed. J Dent 1999;27:247–8. 258.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 276.US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug can National Standards Institute. Flash sterilization: steam steriliza- Administration. 21 CFR Part 872.6730. Dental devices; endodontic tion of patient care items for immediate use. ANSI/AAMI ST37-1996. dry heat sterilizer; final rule. Federal Register 1997;62:2903. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru- 277.Favero MS. Current issues in hospital hygiene and sterilization tech- mentation, 1996. nology. J Infect Control (Asia Pacific Edition) 1998;1:8–10. 259.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- 278.Greene WW. Control of sterilization process [Chapter 22]. In: Russell can National Standards Institute. Ethylene oxide sterilization in health AD, Hugo WB, Ayliffe GA, eds. Principles and practice of disinfec- care facilities: safety and effectiveness. ANSI/AAMI ST41-1999. tion, preservation, and sterilization. Oxford, England: Blackwell Sci- Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru- entific Publications, 1992:605–24. mentation, 1999. 56 MMWR December 19, 2003 279.Favero MS. Developing indicators for sterilization [Chapter 13]. In: 300.Greene R, State and Territorial Association on Alternate Treatment Rutala W, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in health care. Technologies. Technical assistance manual: state regulatory oversight Washington, DC: Association for Professionals in Infection Control of medical waste treatment technologies. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: and Epidemiology, Inc., 1998:119–32. US Environmental Protection Agency, 1994. Available at http://www. 280.Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Flash sterilization: carefully measured haste. epa.gov/epaoswer/other/medical/mwpdfs/ta/1.pdf. Infect Control 1987;8:307–10. 301.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Part 60. Standards of 281.Andres MT, Tejerina JM, Fierro JF. Reliability of biologic indicators in performance for new stationary sources and emission guidelines for a mail-return sterilization-monitoring service: a review of 3 years. existing sources: hospital/medical/infectious waste incinerators; final Quintessence Int 1995;26:865–70. rule. Federal Register 1997;62:48347–91. 282.Miller CH, Sheldrake MA. The ability of biological indicators to 302.Slade JS, Pike EB, Eglin RP, Colbourne JS, Kurtz JB. The survival of detect sterilization failures. Am J Dent 1994;7:95–7. human immunodeficiency virus in water, sewage, and sea water. Water 283.Association of Operating Room Nurses. AORN standards and recom- Sci Tech 1989;21:55–9. mended practices for perioperative nursing. Denver, CO: AORN, 1987. 303.Walker JT, Bradshaw DJ, Bennett AM, Fulford MR, Martin MV, Marsh 284.Mayworm D. Sterile shelf life and expiration dating. J Hosp Supply PD. Microbial biofilm formation and contamination of dental-unit Process Distrib 1984;2:32–5. water systems in general dental practice. Appl Environ Microbiol 285.Cardo DM, Sehulster LM. Central sterile supply [Chapter 65]. In: 2000;66:3363–7. Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control. 2nd 304.Schulze-Robbecke R, Feldmann C, Fischeder R, Janning B, Exner M, ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:1023–30. Wahl G. Dental units: an environmental study of sources of poten- 286.Maki DG, Alvarado CJ, Hassemer CA, Zilz MA. Relation of the tially pathogenic mycobacteria. Tuber Lung Dis 1995;76:318–23. inanimate hospital environment to endemic nosocomial infection. 305.Barbeau J, Tanguay R, Faucher E, et al. Multiparametric analysis of N Engl J Med 1982;307:1562–6. waterline contamination in dental units. Appl Environ Microbiol 287.Danforth D, Nicolle LE, Hume K, Alfieri N, Sims H. Nosocomial 1996;62:3954–9. infections on nursing units with floors cleaned with a disinfectant com- 306.Atlas RM, Williams JF, Huntington MK. Legionella contamination of pared with detergent. J Hosp Infect 1987;10:229–35. dental-unit waters. Appl Environ Microbiol 1995;61:1208–13. 288.Crawford JJ. Clinical asepsis in dentistry. Mesquite, TX: Oral Medi- 307.Kelstrup J, Funder-Nielsen T, Theilade J. Microbial aggregate contami- cine Press, 1987. nation of water lines in dental equipment and its control. Acta Pathol 289.Food and Drug Administration. Design control guidance for medical Microbiol Scand [B] 1977;85:177–83. device manufacturers. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and 308.Challacombe SJ, Fernandes LL. Detecting Legionella pneumophila in Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1997. water systems: a comparison of various dental units. J Am Dent Assoc 290.Fauerbach LL, Janelle JW. Practical applications in infection control 1995;126:603–8. [Chapter 45]. In: Block SS, ed. 5th ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 309.Mayo JA, Oertling KM, Andrieu SC. Bacterial biofilm: a source of con- preservation. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, tamination in dental air-water syringes. Clin Prev Dent 1990;12:13–20. 2001:935–44. 310.Scheid RC, Kim CK, Bright JS, Whitely MS, Rosen S. Reduction of 291.Martin LS, McDougal JS, Loskoski SL. Disinfection and inactivation microbes in handpieces by flushing before use. J Am Dent Assoc of the human T lymphotrophic virus type III/lymphadenopathy- 1982;105:658–60. associated virus. J Infect Dis 1985;152:400–3. 311.Bagga BS, Murphy RA, Anderson AW, Punwani I. Contamination of 292.Bloomfield SF, Smith-Burchnell CA, Dalgleish AG. Evaluation of dental unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its preven- hypochlorite-releasing disinfectants against the human immunodefi- tion. J Am Dent Assoc 1984;109:712–6. ciency virus (HIV). J Hosp Infect 1990;15:273–8. 312.Martin MV. The significance of the bacterial contamination of dental 293.Gerson SL, Parker P, Jacobs MR, Creger R, Lazarus HM. Aspergillosis unit water systems. Br Dent J 1987;163:152–4. due to carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 313.Pankhurst CL, Philpott-Howard JN, Hewitt JH, Casewell MW. The 1994;15:221–3. efficacy of chlorination and filtration in the control and eradication of 294.Suzuki A, Namba Y, Matsuura M, Horisawa A. Bacterial contamina- Legionella from dental chair water systems. J Hosp Infect 1990;16:9–18. tion of floors and other surfaces in operating rooms: a five–year survey. 314.Mills SE, Lauderdale PW, Mayhew RB. Reduction of microbial con- J Hyg (Lond) 1984;93:559–66. tamination in dental units with povidone-iodine 10%. J Am Dent 295.Skoutelis AT, Westenfelder GO, Beckerdite M, Phair JP. Hospital car- Assoc 1986;113:280–4. peting and epidemiology of Clostridium difficile. Am J Infect Control 315.Williams JF, Johnston AM, Johnson B, Huntington MK, Mackenzie 1994;22:212–7. CD. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines: prevalence, 296.Rutala WA, Odette RL, Samsa GP. Management of infectious waste intensity and microbiological characteristics. J Am Dent Assoc by US hospitals. JAMA 1989;262:1635–40. 1993;124:59–65. 297.CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion. Sum- 316.Mills SE. The dental unit waterline controversy: defusing the myths, mary of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry report defining the solutions. J Am Dent Assoc 2000;131:1427–41. to Congress: the public health implications of medical waste. MMWR 317.Jones F, Bartlett CL. Infections associated with whirlpools and spas. 1990; 39:822–4. Soc Appl Bacteriol Symp Ser 1985;14:61S–6S. 298.Palenik CJ. Managing regulated waste in dental environments. 318.Hollyoak V, Allison D, Summers J. Pseudomonas aeruginosa wound J Contemp Dent Pract 2003;4:76. infection associated with a nursing home’s whirlpool bath. Commun 299.Rutala WA, Mayhall CG. Medical waste. Infect Control Hosp Dis Rep CDR Rev 1995;5:R100–2. Edidemiol 1992;13:38–48. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 57 319.Begg N, O’Mahony M, Penny P, Richardson EA, Basavaraj DS. Myco- 338.Santiago JI. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines: short bacterium chelonei associated with a hospital hydrotherapy pool. Com- and long term effects of flushing. Gen Dent 1994;42:528–35. munity Med 1986;8:348–50. 339.Shearer BG. Biofilm and the dental office. J Am Dent Assoc 1996; 320.Laussucq S, Baltch AL, Smith RP, et al. Nosocomial Mycobacterium 127:181–9. fortuitum colonization from a contaminated ice machine. Am Rev 340.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri- Respir Dis 1988;138:891–4. can National Standards Institute. Hemodialysis systems. ANSI/AAMI 321.Struelens MJ, Rost F, Deplano A, et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and RD5-1992. Arlington, VA: Association for the Advancement of Medi- Enterobacteriaceae bacteremia after biliary endoscopy: an outbreak cal Instrumentation, 1993. investigation using DNA macrorestriction analysis. Am J Med 1993;95: 341.US Environmental Protection Agency. National primary drinking water 489–98. regulations, 1999: list of contaminants. Washington DC: US Envi- 322.Kuritsky JN, Bullen MG, Broome CV, Silcox VA, Good RC, Wallace RJ ronmental Protection Agency, 1999. Available at http://www.epa.gov/ Jr. Sternal wound infections and endocarditis due to organisms of the safewater/mcl.html. Mycobacterium fortuitum complex. Ann Intern Med 1983;98:938–9. 342.American Public Health Association, American Water Works Associa- 323.Bolan G, Reingold AL, Carson LA, et al. Infections with Mycobacte- tion, Water Environment Foundation. In: Eaton AD, Clesceri LS, rium chelonei in patients receiving dialysis and using processed Greenberg AE, eds. Standard methods for the examination of water hemodialyzers. J Infect Dis 1985;152:1013–9. and wastewater. Washington, DC: American Public Health Associa- 324.Lessing MP, Walker MM. Fatal pulmonary infection due to Mycobac- tion, 1999. terium fortuitum. J Clin Pathol 1993;46:271–2. 343.Williams HN, Johnson A, Kelley JI, et al. Bacterial contamination of 325.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosoco- the water supply in newly installed dental units. Quintessence Int mial Legionnaires’ disease caused by aerosolized tap water from respi- 1995;26:331–7. ratory devices. J Infect Dis 1982;146:460–7. 344.Scheid RC, Rosen S, Beck FM. Reduction of CFUs in high-speed hand- 326.Breiman RF, Fields BS, Sanden GN, Volmer L, Meier A, Spika JS. piece water lines over time. Clin Prev Dent 1990;12:9–12. Association of shower use with Legionnaires’ disease: possible role of 345.Williams HN, Kelley J, Folineo D, Williams GC, Hawley CL, Sibiski amoebae. JAMA 1990;263:2924–6. J. Assessing microbial contamination in clean water dental units and 327.Garbe PL, Davis BJ, Weisfeld JS, et al. Nosocomial Legionnaires’ dis- compliance with disinfection protocol. J Am Dent Assoc 1994;125: ease: epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. JAMA 1205–11. 1985;254:521–4. 346.CDC, Working Group on Waterborne Cryptosporidiosis. 328.Fallon RJ, Rowbotham TJ. Microbiological investigations into an out- Cryptosporidium and water: a public health handbook. Atlanta, GA: break of Pontiac fever due to Legionella micdadei associated with use of US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser- a whirlpool. J Clin Pathol 1990;43:479–83. vice, CDC, 1997. 329.Rose CS, Martyny JW, Newman LS, et al. “Lifeguard lung”: endemic 347.MacKenzie WR, Hoxie NJ, Proctor ME, et al. A massive outbreak in granulomatous pneumonitis in an indoor swimming pool. Am J Pub- Milwaukee of cryptosporidium infection transmitted through the public lic Health 1998;88:1795–1800. water supply. N Engl J Med 1994;331:161–7. 330.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: Legionnaires’ disease outbreak 348.Kaminski JC. Cryptosporidium and the public water supply. N Engl associated with a grocery store mist machine—Louisiana, 1989. J Med 1994;331:1529–30. MMWR 1990;39:108–10. 349.CDC. Assessing the public health threat associated with waterborne 331.Jacobs RL, Thorner RE, Holcomb JR, Schwietz LA, Jacobs FO. cryptosporidiosis: report of a workshop. MMWR 1995;44(No. RR-6). Hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by Cladosporium in an enclosed 350.CDC. Surveillance for waterborne-disease outbreaks—United States, hot-tub area. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:204–6. 1993–1994. MMWR 1996;45(No. SS-1). 332.Clark A. Bacterial colonization of dental units and the nasal flora of 351.Office of Water, US Environmental Protection Agency. Lead and cop- dental personnel. Proc Roy Soc Med 1974;67:1269–70. per rule: summary of revisions. EPA 815–R–99–020. Washington DC: 333.Fotos PG, Westfall HN, Snyder IS, Miller RW, Mutchler BM. Preva- US Environmental Protection Agency, 2000. lence of Legionella-specific IgG and IgM antibody in a dental clinic 352.US Environmental Protection Agency. 65 CFR Parts 141 and 142. population. J Dent Res 1985;64:1382–5. National primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper, final 334.Reinthaler FF, Mascher F, Stunzner D. Serological examinations for rule. Federal Register 2000;1949–2015. antibodies against Legionella species in dental personnel. J Dent Res 353.Gooch B, Marianos D, Ciesielski C, et al. Lack of evidence for patient- 1988;67:942–3. to-patient transmission of HIV in a dental practice. J Am Dent Assoc 335.Putnins EE, Di Giovanni D, Bhullar AS. Dental unit waterline con- 1993;124:38–44. tamination and its possible implications during periodontal surgery. 354.Crawford JJ, Broderius C. Control of cross-infection risks in the den- J Periodontol 2001;72:393–400. tal operatory: preventon of water retraction by bur cooling spray sys- 336.United States Pharmacopeial Convention. Sterile water for irrigation. tems. J Am Dent Assoc 1988;116:685–7. In: United States Pharmacopeial Convention. United States pharma- 355.Mills SE, Kuehne JC, Bradley DV Jr. Bacteriological analysis of high- copeia and national formulary. USP 24–NF 19. Rockville, MD: United speed handpiece turbines. J Am Dent Assoc 1993;124:59–62. States Pharmacopeial Convention, 1997:1753. 356.Lewis DL, Arens M, Appleton SS, et al. Cross-contamination poten- 337.Milton DK, Wypij D, Kriebel D, Walters MD, Hammond SK, Evans tial with dental equipment. Lancet 1992;340:1252–4. JS. Endotoxin exposure-response in a fiberglass manufacturing facil- 357.Lewis DL, Boe RK. Cross-infection risks associated with current pro- ity. Am J Ind Med 1996;29:3–13. cedures for using high-speed dental handpieces. J Clin Microbiol 1992;30:401–6. 58 MMWR December 19, 2003 358.Checchi L, Montebugnoli L, Samaritani S. Contamination of the tur- 377.Green KA, Mustachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A. bine air chamber: a risk of cross infection. J Clin Periodontol Gadolinium-based MR contrast media: potential for growth of micro- 1998;25:607–11. bial contaminants when single vials are used for multiple patients. 359.Epstein JB, Rea G, Sibau L, Sherlock CH, Le ND. Assessing viral Am J Roentgenol 1995;165:669–71. retention and elimination in rotary dental instruments. J Am Dent 378.American Society of Anesthesiologists. Recommendations for infec- Assoc 1995;126:87–92. tion control for the practice of anesthesiology. 2nd ed. Park Ridge, 360.Kolstad RA. How well does the chemiclave sterilize handpieces? J Am IL: American Society of Anesthesiologists,1999. Dent Assoc 1998;129:985–91. 379.Henry B, Plante-Jenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia 361.Kuehne JS, Cohen ME, Monroe SB. Performance and durability of marcescens associated with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect autoclavable high-speed dental handpieces. NDRI-PR 92-03. Bethesda, Control 2001;29:312–5. MD: Naval Dental Research Institute, 1992. 380.Plott RT, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. Iatrogenic contamination of 362.Andersen HK, Fiehn NE, Larsen T. Effect of steam sterilization inside multidose vials in simulated use. A reassessment of current patient the turbine chambers of dental turbines. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral injection technique. Arch Dermatol 1990;126:1441–4. Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1999;87:184–8. 381.Arrington ME, Gabbert KC, Mazgaj PW, Wolf MT. Multidose vial 363.Leonard DL, Charlton DG. Performance of high-speed dental contamination in anesthesia. AANA J 1990;58:462–6. handpieces subjected to simulated clinical use and sterilization. J Am 382.CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections Dent Assoc 1999;130:1301–11. among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR 2001;50(No. RR-5). 364.Barbeau J, ten Bokum L, Gauthier C, Prevost AP. Cross-contamination 383.Food and Drug Administration. Labeling recommendations for single- potential of saliva ejectors used in dentistry. J Hosp Infect 1998; use devices reprocessed by third parties and hospitals; final guidance 40:303–11. for industry and FDA. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and 365.Mann GL, Campbell TL, Crawford JJ. Backflow in low-volume suc- Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 2001. tion lines: the impact of pressure changes. J Am Dent Assoc 384.Villasenor A, Hill SD, Seale NS. Comparison of two ultrasonic clean- 1996;127:611–5. ing units for deterioration of cutting edges and debris removal on den- 366.Watson CM, Whitehouse RL. Possibility of cross-contamination tal burs. Pediatr Dent 1992;14:326–30. between dental patients by means of the saliva ejector. J Am Dent Assoc 385.Rapisarda E, Bonaccorso A, Tripi TR, Condorelli GG. Effect of steriliza- 1993;124:77–80. tion on the cutting efficiency of rotary nickel-titanium endodontic files. 367.Glass BJ, Terezhalmy GT. Infection control in dental radiology [Chapter Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1999;88:343–7. 15]. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Practical 386.Filho IB, Esberard RM, Leonardo R, del Rio CE. Microscopic evalua- infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore. MD: Williams & tion of three endodontic files pre- and postinstrumentation. J Endo- Wilkins, 1996:229–38. dontics 1998;24:461–4. 368.Haring JI, Jansen L. Infection control and the dental radiographer. In: 387.Silvaggio J, Hicks ML. Effect of heat sterilization on the torsional prop- Haring JI, Jansen L, eds. Dental radiography: principles and techniques. erties of rotary nickel-titanium endodontic files. J Endodontics Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders Co., 2000:194–204. 1997;23:731–4. 369.Hignett M, Claman P. High rates of perforation are found in 388.Kazemi RB, Stenman E, Spangberg LS. The endodontic file is a dis- endovaginal ultrasound probe covers before and after oocyte retrieval posable instrument. J Endodontics 1995;21:451–5. for in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer. J Assist Reprod Genet 389.Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial 1995;12:606–9. endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association. 370.Fritz S, Hust MH, Ochs C, Gratwohl I, Staiger M, Braun B. Use of a JAMA 1990;264:2919–22. latex cover sheath for transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) instead 390.Pallasch TJ, Slots J. Antibiotic prophylaxis and the medically compro- of regular disinfection of the echoscope? Clin Cardiol 1993;16:737–40. mised patient. Periodontology 2000 1996;10:107–38. 371.Milki AA, Fisch JD. Vaginal ultrasound probe cover leakage: implica- 391.Litsky BY, Mascis JD, Litsky W. Use of an antimicrobial mouthwash tions for patient care. Fertil Steril 1998;69:409–11. to minimize the bacterial aerosol contamination generated by the high- 372.Storment JM, Monga M, Blanco JD. Ineffectiveness of latex condoms speed drill. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970;29:25–30. in preventing contamination of the transvaginal ultrasound transducer 392.Mohammed CI, Monserrate V. Preoperative oral rinsing as a means of head. South Med J 1997;90:206–8. reducing air contamination during use of air turbine handpieces. Oral 373.Amis S, Ruddy M, Kibbler CC, Economides DL, MacLean AB. Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970;29:291–4. Assessment of condoms as probe covers for transvaginal sonography. 393.Wyler D, Miller RL, Micik RE. Efficacy of self-administered preop- J Clin Ultrasound 2000;28:295–8. erative oral hygiene procedures in reducing the concentration of bac- 374.Rooks VJ, Yancey MK, Elg SA, Brueske L. Comparison of probe sheaths teria in aerosols generated during dental procedures. J Dent Res for endovaginal sonography. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:27–9. 1971;50:509. 375.Hokett SD, Honey JR, Ruiz F, Baisden MK, Hoen MM. Assessing the 394.Muir KF, Ross PW, MacPhee IT, Holbrook WP, Kowolik MJ. Reduc- effectiveness of direct digital radiography barrier sheaths and finger tion of microbial contamination from ultrasonic scalers. Br Dent cots. J Am Dent Assoc 2000;131:463–7. J 1978;145:76–8. 376.ASHP Council on Professional Affairs. ASHP guidelines on quality 395.Fine DH, Mendieta C, Barnett ML, et al. Efficacy of preprocedural assurance for pharmacy-prepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst rinsing with an antiseptic in reducing viable bacteria in dental aero- Pharm 2000;57:1150–69. sols. J Periodontol 1992;63:821–4. 396.Fine DH, Furgang D, Korik I, Olshan A, Barnett ML, Vincent JW. Reduction of viable bacteria in dental aerosols by preprocedural rins- ing with an antiseptic mouthrinse. Am J Dent 1993;6:219–21. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 59 397.Fine DH, Yip J, Furgang D, Barnett ML, Olshan AM, Vincent J. 416.Molinari J. Dental. In: Association for Professionals in Infection Con- Reducing bacteria in dental aerosols: pre-procedural use of an antisep- trol and Epidemiology, Inc. (APIC). APIC text of infection control tic mouth rinse. J Am Dent Assoc 1993;124:56–8. and epidemiology. Washington, DC: Association for Professionals in 398.Logothetis DD, Martinez-Welles JM. Reducing bacterial aerosol con- Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc, 2002. tamination with a chlorhexidine gluconate pre-rinse. J Am Dent Assoc 417.Sofou A, Larsen T, Fiehn NE, Owall B. Contamination level of algi- 1995;126:1634–9. nate impressions arriving at a dental laboratory. Clin Oral Invest 399.Klyn SL, Cummings DE, Richardson BW, Davis RD. Reduction of 2002;6:161–5. bacteria-containing spray produced during ultrasonic scaling. Gen Dent 418.McNeill MR, Coulter WA, Hussey DL. Disinfection of irreversible 2001;49:648–52. hydrocolloid impressions: a comparative study. Int J Prosthodont 400.Brown AR, Papasian CJ, Shultz P, Theisen FC, Shultz RE. Bacteremia 1992;5:563–7. and intraoral suture removal: can an antimicrobial rinse help? J Am 419.Gerhardt DE, Sydiskis RJ. Impression materials and virus. J Am Dent Dent Assoc 1998;129:1455–61. Assoc 1991;122:51–4. 401.Lockhart PB. An analysis of bacteremias during dental extractions. 420.Leung RL, Schonfeld SE. Gypsum casts as a potential source of micro- A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of chlorhexidine. Arch bial cross-contamination. J Prosthet Dent 1983;49:210–1. Intern Med 1996;156:513–20. 421.Huizing KL, Palenik CJ, Setcos JC, Sheldrake MA, Miller, CH. Method 402.Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial of evaluating the antimicrobial abilities of disinfectant-containing gyp- endocarditis: recommendations by the American Heart Association. sum products. QDT Yearbook 1994;17:172–6. JAMA 1997;277:1794–1801. 422.Verran J, Kossar S, McCord JF. Microbiological study of selected risk 403.Tate WH, White RR. Disinfection of human teeth for educational areas in dental technology laboratories. J Dent 1996;24:77–80. purposes. J Dent Educ 1991;55:583–5. 423.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 404.Pantera EA Jr, Zambon JJ, Shih-Levine M. Indirect immunofluores- Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincin- cence for the detection of Bacteroides species in human dental pulp. nati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public J Endodontics 1988;14:218–23. Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 405.Pantera EA Jr, Schuster GS. Sterilization of extracted human teeth. Health, 1988. HETA 85-136-1932. J Dent Educ 1990;54:283–5. 424.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 406.Parsell DE, Stewart BM, Barker JR, Nick TG, Karns L, Johnson RB. Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincin- The effect of steam sterilization on the physical properties and per- nati, OH: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public ceived cutting characteristics of extracted teeth. J Dent Educ 1998; Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and 62;260–3. Health, 1990. HETA 88-101-2008. 407.American Dental Association’s Council on Scientific Affairs and Coun- 425.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Con- cil on Dental Practice. Infection control recommendations for the dental trol of smoke from laser/electric surgical procedures. Cincinnati, OH: office and the dental laboratory. J Am Dent Assoc 1996;127:672–80. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser- 408.Dental Laboratory Relationship Working Group, Organization for vice, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Safety and Asepsis Procedures (OSAP). Laboratory asepsis position 1996. DHHS publication no. (NIOSH) 96-128. paper. Annapolis, MD: OSAP Foundation, 1998. Available at http:// 426.Taravella MJ, Weinberg A, Blackburn P, May M. Do intact viral particles www.osap.org/issues/pages/position/LAB.pdf. survive excimer laser ablation? Arch Ophthalmol 1997;115:1028–30. 409.Kugel G, Perry RD, Ferrari M, Lalicata P. Disinfection and communi- 427.Hagen KB, Kettering JD, Aprecio RM, Beltran F, Maloney RK. Lack cation practices: a survey of U. S. dental laboratories. J Am Dent Assoc of virus transmission by the excimer laser plume. Am J Ophthalmol 2000;131:786–92. 1997;124:206–11. 410.US Department of Transportation. 49 CFR 173.196 infectious sub- 428.Kunachak S, Sithisarn P, Kulapaditharom B. Are laryngeal papilloma stances (etiologic agents) 173.197 regulated medical waste. Available virus-infected cells viable in the plume derived from a continuous mode at http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_02/49cfr173_02.html. carbon dioxide laser, and are they infectious? A preliminary report on 411.Chau VB, Saunders TR, Pimsler M, Elfring DR. In-depth disinfection one laser mode. J Laryng Otol 1996;110:1031–3. of acrylic resins. J Prosthet Dent 1995;74:309–13. 429.Hughes PS, Hughes AP. Absence of human papillomavirus DNA in 412.Powell GL, Runnells RD, Saxon BA, Whisenant BK. The presence the plume of erbium: YAG laser-treated warts. J Am Acad Dermatol and identification of organisms transmitted to dental laboratories. 1998;38:426–8. J Prosthet Dent 1990;64:235–7. 430.Garden JM, O’Banion MK, Shelnitz LS, et al. Papillomavirus in the 413.Giblin J, Podesta R, White J. Dimensional stability of impression vapor of carbon dioxide laser-treated verrucae. JAMA 1988;259: materials immersed in an iodophor disinfectant. Int J Prosthodont 1199–1202. 1990;3:72–7. 431.Sawchuk WS, Weber PJ, Lowry DR, Dzubow LM. Infectious 414.Plummer KD, Wakefield CW. Practical infection control in dental labo- papillomavirus in the vapor of warts treated with carbon dioxide laser ratories. Gen Dent 1994;42:545–8. or electrocoagulation: detection and protection. J Am Acad Dermatol 415.Merchant VA. Infection control in the dental laboratory equipment 1989;21:41–9. [Chapter 16]. In: Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Prac- 432.Baggish MS, Poiesz BJ, Joret D, Williamson P, Rafai A. Presence of tical infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Williams & human immunodeficiency virus DNA in laser smoke. Lasers Surg Med Wilkins, 1996:239–54. 1991;11:197–203. 433.Capizzi PJ, Clay RP, Battey MJ. Microbiologic activity in laser resur- facing plume and debris. Lasers Surg Med 1998;23:172–4. 60 MMWR December 19, 2003 434.McKinley IB Jr, Ludlow MO. Hazards of laser smoke during endo- 454.Hill AF, Butterworth RJ, Joiner S, et al. Investigation of variant dontic therapy. J Endodontics 1994;20:558–9. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and other human prion diseases with tonsil 435.Favero MS, Bolyard EA. Microbiologic considerations. Disinfection biopsy specimens. Lancet 1999;353:183–9. and sterilization strategies and the potential for airborne transmission 455.Brown P, Gibbs CJ Jr, Rodgers-Johnson P, et al. Human spongiform of bloodborne pathogens. Surg Clin North Am 1995;75:1071–89. encephalopathy: the National Institutes of Health series of 300 cases 436.Association of Operating Room Nurses. Recommended practices for of experimentally transmitted disease. Ann Neurol 1994;35:513–29. laser safety in the practice setting. In: Fogg D, ed. Standards, recom- 456.Brown P. Environmental causes of human spongiform encephalopa- mended practices and guidelines. Denver, CO: AORN, 2003. thy [Chapter 8]. In: Baker HF, Baker HF, eds. Prion diseases. Totowa, 437.Streifel AJ. Recognizing IAQ risk and implementing an IAQ program. NJ: Humana Press Inc, 1996:139–54. In: Hansen W, ed. A guide to managing indoor air quality in health 457.Carp RI. Transmission of scrapie by oral route: effect of gingival scari- care organizations. Oakbrook Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on fication. Lancet 1982;1:170–1. Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations Publishers, 1997. 458.Ingrosso L, Pisani F, Pocchiari M. Transmission of the 263K scrapie 438.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- strain by the dental route. J Gen Virol 1999;80:3043–7. tration. Safety and health topics: laser/electrosurgery plume. Washing- 459.Bernoulli C, Siegfried J, Baumgartner G, et al. Danger of accidental ton DC: US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health person-to-person transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease by surgery. Administration, 2003. Available at http://www.osha-slc.gov/SLTC/ Lancet 1977;1:478–9. laserelectrosurgeryplume. 460.Brown P, Gajdusek DC, Gibbs CJ Jr, Asher DM. Potential epidemic of 439.American Thoracic Society, CDC. Diagnostic standards and classifi- Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from human growth hormone therapy. cation of tuberculosis in adults and children. Am J Resp Crit Care N Engl J Med 1985;313:728–31. 2000;161:1376–95. 461.CDC. Fatal degenerative neurologic disease in patients who received 440.Wells WF. Aerodynamics of droplet nuclei [Chapter 3]. In: Wells WF, pituitary-derived human growth hormone. MMWR 1985;34:359–60, ed. Airborne contagion and air hygiene: an ecological study of droplet 365–6. infections. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955. 462.Duffy P, Wolf J, Collins G, DeVoe AG, Streeten B, Cowen D. Possible 441.CDC. Prevention and treatment of tuberculosis among patients person-to-person transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. N Engl infected with human immunodeficiency virus: principles of therapy J Med 1974;290:692–3. and revised recommendations. MMWR 1998;47(No. RR-20). 463.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports: rapidly progressive dementia 442.Smith WH, Davies D, Mason KD, Onions JP. Intraoral and pulmo- in a patient who received a cadaveric dura mater graft. MMWR nary tuberculosis following dental treatment. Lancet 1982;1:842–4. 1987;36:49–50, 55. 443.CDC. Self-reported tuberculin skin testing among Indian Health Ser- 464.Thadani V, Penar PL, Partington J, et al. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease prob- vice and Bureau of Prisons dentists, 1993. MMWR 1994;43:209–11. ably acquired from a cadaveric dura mater graft. Case report. 444.Mikitka D, Mills SE, Dazey SE, Gabriel ME. Tuberculosis infection in J Neurosurg 1988;69:766–9. US Air Force dentists. Am J Dent 1995;8:33–6. 465.Kondo K, Kuroiwa Y. A case control study of Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis- 445.CDC. World Health Organization consultation on public health issues ease: association with physical injuries. Ann Neurol 1982;11:377–81. related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the emergence of a 466.Van Duijn CM, Delasnerie-Laupretre N, Masullo C, et al, and Euro- new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease. MMWR 1996;45:295–6. pean Union (EU) Collaborative Study Group of Creutzfeldt-Jacob dis- 446.CDC. Surveillance for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease—United States. ease (CJD). Case-control study of risk factors of Creutzfeldt-Jakob MMWR 1996;45:665–8. disease in Europe during 1993–95. Lancet 1998;351:1081–5. 447.Johnson RT, Gibbs CJ Jr. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and related trans- 467.Collins S, Law MG, Fletcher A, Boyd A, Kaldor J, Masters CL. Surgi- missible spongiform encephalopathies. N Engl J Med 1998;339: cal treatment and risk of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: a case- 1994–2004. control study. Lancet 1999;353:693–7. 448.CDC. New variant CJD: fact sheet. Atlanta, GA: US Department of 468.Blanquet-Grossard F, Sazdovitch V, Jean A, et al. Prion protein is not Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 2003. Avail- detectable in dental pulp from patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis- able at http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/cjd/cjd_fact_sheet.htm. ease. J Dent Res 2000;79:700. 449.Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, et al. A new variant of Creutzfeldt- 469.World Health Organization. Infection control guidelines for transmis- Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 1996;347:921–5. sible spongiform encephalopathies: report of a WHO consultation, 450.Bruce ME, Will RG, Ironside JW, et al. Transmission to mice indicate Geneva, Switzerland, 23–26 March 1999. Geneva, Switzerland: World that ‘new variant’ CJD is caused by the BSE agent. Nature 1997;389: Health Organization, 2000. Available at http://www.who.int/emc- 498–501. documents/tse/whocdscsraph2003c.html. 451.Collinge J, Sidle KC, Meads J, Ironside J, Hill AF. Molecular analysis 470.Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in of prion strain variation and the aetiology of ‘new variant’ CJD. America. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donadlson MS, eds. To err is Nature 1996;383:685–90. human: building a safe health system. Washington, DC: National Acad- 452.World Health Organization. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). emy Press, 1999. Fact Sheet No. 113. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza- 471.CDC. Framework for program evaluation in public health. MMWR tion, 2002. Available at http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/ 1999;48(No. RR-11). fs113/en/. 453.CDC. Probable variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in a U.S. resident— Florida, 2002. MMWR 2002;51:927–9. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 61 Advisory Group Joseph A. Bartoloni, D.M.D., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois; Nancy Bjerke, M.A., M.Ed., M.P.H., Infection Control Associates, San Antonio, Texas; Walter W. Bond, M.S., RCSA Inc., Lawrenceville, Georgia; Eve Cuny, M.S., University of Pacific School of Dentistry, San Francisco, California; Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P., Forsyth Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; Curt Hamann, M.D., Smart Practice, Phoenix, Arizona; Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois; Chris Miller, Ph.D., Indiana University School of Dentistry, Bloomington, Indiana; Shannon E. Mills, D.D.S., Air Force Medical Operations Agency, Bolling AFB, Washington, District of Columbia; John Molinari, Ph.D., University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry, Detroit, Michigan; William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Brian Shearer, Ph.D., Bayer, Inc., Chicago, Illinois. CDC Consultants Matthew Arduino, Dr.P.H., Elizabeth Bolyard, M.P.H., Denise Cardo, M.D., Joe Carpenter, Linda Chiarello, M.P.H., Lynne Sehulster, Ph.D., Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases (NCID), Atlanta, Georgia; Miriam J. Alter, Ph.D., Division of Viral Hepatitis, NCID; Larry Schonberger, Ph.D., Ermias Belay, M.D., Division of Viral and Ricketsial Diseases, NCID, Atlanta, Georgia; Susan Y. Chu, Ph.D., National Immunization Program, Atlanta, Georgia; Paul A. Jensen, National Center for HIV, STD and TB Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; Janice Huy, National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Cincinnati, Ohio; Lee Petsonk, NIOSH, Morgantown, West Virginia; Jennifer L. Cleveland, D.D.S., Amy S. Collins, M.P.H., Barbara F. Gooch, D.M.D., William G. Kohn, D.D.S., Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H., Division of Oral Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Atlanta Georgia. Other Federal Consultants Susan Runner, D.D.S., Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland; Elise Handelman, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Washington, District of Columbia; Jeffrey Kempter, M.S., David Liem, Ph.D., Michelle Wingfield, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, District of Columbia. Outside Consultants Martin S. Favero, Ph.D., Advanced Sterilization Products, Johnson and Johnson, Irvine, California; Pamela Rodgers, Ph.D., SmartHealth Inc., Phoenix, Arizona; Daniel M. Meyer, D.D.S., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois; Deborah Greenspan, BDS, DSC University of California San Francisco School of Dentistry, San Francisco, California; Helene Bednarsh, Boston Department of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts; Steve Peake, Barnstead- Harvey Corp, Dubuque, Iowa; Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois. 62 MMWR December 19, 2003 Appendix A Regulatory Framework for Disinfectants and Sterilants When using the guidance provided in this report may be used without causing unreasonable adverse effects, the regarding use of liquid chemical disinfectants and sterilants, product and its labeling are given an EPA registration num- dental health-care personnel (DHCP) should be aware of fed- ber, and the manufacturer may then sell and distribute the eral laws and regulations that govern the sale, distribution, product in the United States. FIFRA requires users of prod- and use of these products. In particular, DHCPs should know ucts to follow the labeling directions on each product explicitly. what requirements pertain to them when such products are The following statement appears on all EPA-registered prod- used. Finally, DHCP should understand the relative roles of uct labels under the Directions for Use heading: “It is a viola- the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. tion of federal law to use this product inconsistent with its Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Occupational labeling.” This means that DHCP must follow the safety pre- Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and CDC. cautions and use directions on the labeling of each registered The choice of specific cleaning or disinfecting agents is largely product. Not following the specified dilution, contact time, a matter of judgment, guided by product label claims and method of application, or any other condition of use is con- instructions and government regulations. A single liquid chemi- sidered misuse of the product. cal germicide might not satisfy all disinfection requirements FDA, under the authority of the 1976 Medical Devices in a given dental practice or facility. Realistic use of liquid Amendment to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, regulates chemical germicides depends on consideration of multiple fac- chemical germicides if they are advertised and marketed for tors, including the degree of microbial killing required; the use on specific medical devices (e.g., dental unit waterline or nature and composition of the surface, item, or device to be flexible endoscope). A liquid chemical germicide marketed for treated; and the cost, safety, and ease of use of the available use on a specific device is considered, for regulatory purposes, agents. Selecting one appropriate product with a higher de- a medical device itself when used to disinfect that specific medi- gree of potency to cover all situations might be more conve- cal device. Also, this FDA regulatory authority over a particu- nient. lar instrument or device dictates that the manufacturer is In the United States, liquid chemical germicides (disinfec- obligated to provide the user with adequate instructions for tants) are regulated by EPA and FDA (A-1–A-3). In health- the safe and effective use of that device. These instructions care settings, EPA regulates disinfectants that are used on must include methods to clean and disinfect or sterilize the environmental surfaces (housekeeping and clinical contact item if it is to be marketed as a reusable medical device. surfaces), and FDA regulates liquid chemical sterilants/ OSHA develops workplace standards to help ensure safe and high-level disinfectants (e.g., glutaraldehyde, hydrogen perox- healthful working conditions in places of employment. OSHA ide, and peracetic acid) used on critical and semicritical patient- is authorized under Pub. L. 95-251, and as amended, to en- care devices. Disinfectants intended for use on clinical contact force these workplace standards. In 1991, OSHA published surfaces (e.g., light handles, radiographic-ray heads, or drawer Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens; final rule knobs) or housekeeping surfaces (e.g., floors, walls, or sinks) [29 CFR Part 1910.1030] (A-5). This standard is designed to are regulated in interstate commerce by the Antimicrobials help prevent occupational exposures to blood or other poten- Division, Office of Pesticide Programs, EPA, under the tially infectious substances. Under this standard, OSHA has authority of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and interpreted that, to decontaminate contaminated work sur- Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) of 1947, as amended in 1996 (A-4). faces, either an EPA-registered hospital tuberculocidal disin- Under FIFRA, any substance or mixture of substances intended fectant or an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant labeled as to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, including effective against human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and microorganisms but excluding those in or on living man or hepatitis B virus (HBV) is appropriate. Hospital disinfectants animals, must be registered before sale or distribution. To with such HIV and HBV claims can be used, provided sur- obtain a registration, a manufacturer must submit specific data faces are not contaminated with agents or concentration of regarding the safety and the effectiveness of each product. agents for which higher level (i.e., intermediate-level) disin- EPA requires manufacturers to test formulations by using fection is recommended. In addition, as with all disinfectants, accepted methods for microbicidal activity, stability, and tox- effectiveness is governed by strict adherence to the label icity to animals and humans. Manufacturers submit these data instructions for intended use of the product. to EPA with proposed labeling. If EPA concludes a product Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 63 CDC is not a regulatory agency and does not test, evaluate, against a primarily nosocomial pathogen. Substantiated label or otherwise recommend specific brand-name products of claims of effectiveness of a disinfectant against specific micro- chemical germicides. This report is intended to provide over- organisms other than the test microorganisms are permitted, all guidance for providers to select general classifications of but not required, provided that the test microorganisms are products based on certain infection-control principles. In this likely to be present in or on the recommended use areas and report, CDC provides guidance to practitioners regarding surfaces. Therefore, manufacturers might also test specifically appropriate application of EPA- and FDA-registered liquid against organisms of known concern in health-care practices chemical disinfectants and sterilants in dental health-care set- (e.g., HIV, HBV, hepatitis C virus [HCV], and herpes) al- tings. though it is considered likely that any product satisfying AOAC CDC recommends disinfecting environmental surfaces or tests for hospital disinfectant designation will also be effective sterilizing or disinfecting medical equipment, and DHCP against these relatively fragile organisms when the product is should use products approved by EPA and FDA unless no used as directed by the manufacturer. such products are available for use against certain microorgan- Potency against Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been recog- isms or sites. However, if no registered or approved products nized as a substantial benchmark. However, the tuberculocidal are available for a specific pathogen or use situation, DHCP claim is used only as a benchmark to measure germicidal are advised to follow the specific guidance regarding unregis- potency. Tuberculosis is not transmitted via environmental sur- tered or unapproved (e.g., off-label) uses for various chemical faces but rather by the airborne route. Accordingly, use of such germicides. For example, no antimicrobial products are regis- products on environmental surfaces plays no role in prevent- tered for use specifically against certain emerging pathogens ing the spread of tuberculosis. However, because mycobacte- (e.g., Norwalk virus), potential terrorism agents (e.g., variola ria have among the highest intrinsic levels of resistance among major or Yersinia pestis), or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease agents. the vegetative bacteria, viruses, and fungi, any germicide with One point of clarification is the difference in how EPA and a tuberculocidal claim on the label is considered capable of FDA classify disinfectants. FDA adopted the same basic ter- inactivating a broad spectrum of pathogens, including such minology and classification scheme as CDC to categorize less-resistant organisms as bloodborne pathogens (e.g., HBV, medical devices (i.e., critical, semicritical, and noncritical) and HCV, and HIV). It is this broad-spectrum capability, rather to define antimicrobial potency for processing surfaces (i.e., than the product’s specific potency against mycobacteria, that sterilization, and high-, intermediate- and low-level disinfec- is the basis for protocols and regulations dictating use of tion) (A-6). EPA registers environmental surface disinfectants tuberculocidal chemicals for surface disinfection. based on the manufacturer’s microbiological activity claims EPA also lists disinfectant products according to their when registering its disinfectant. This difference has led to con- labeled use against these organisms of interest as follows: fusion on the part of users because the EPA does not use the (cid:127) List B. Tuberculocide products effective against Mycobac- terms intermediate- and low-level disinfectants as used in CDC terium species. guidelines. (cid:127) List C. Products effective against human HIV-1 virus. CDC designates any EPA-registered hospital disinfectant (cid:127) List D. Products effective against human HIV-1 virus and without a tuberculocidal claim as a low-level disinfectant and HBV. any EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal (cid:127) List E. Products effective against Mycobacterium species, claim as an intermediate-level disinfectant. To understand this human HIV-1 virus, and HBV. comparison, one needs to know how EPA registers disinfec- (cid:127) List F. Products effective against HCV. tants. First, to be labeled as an EPA hospital disinfectant, the Microorganisms vary in their resistance to disinfection and product must pass Association of Official Analytical Chemists sterilization, enabling CDC’s designation of disinfectants as (AOAC) effectiveness tests against three target organisms: Sal- high-, intermediate-, and low-level, when compared with EPA’s monella choleraesuis for effectiveness against gram-negative designated organism spectrum (Figure). However, exceptions bacteria; Staphylococcus aureus for effectiveness against gram- to this general guide exist, and manufacturer’s label claims and positive bacteria; and Pseudomonas aeruginosa for effectiveness instructions should always be followed. 64 MMWR December 19, 2003 FIGURE. Decreasing order of resistance of microorganisms to germicidal chemicals Organism Processing Level Required Sterilization Bacterial spores FDA sterilant/high-level disinfectant Geobacillus stearothermophilus (= CDC sterilant/high-level disinfectant) Bacillus atrophaeus Mycobacteria EPA hospital disinfectant with Mycobacterium tuberculosis tuberculocidal claim Nonlipid or small viruses (= CDC intermediate-level disinfectant) Polio virus Coxsackle virus Rhinovirus Fungi Aspergillus Candida Vegetative bacteria EPA hospital disinfectant Staphylococcus species (= CDC low-level disinfectant) Pseudomonus species Salmonella species Lipid or medium-sized viruses Human immunodeficiency virus Herpes simplex virus Hepatitis B and hepatitis C Coronavirus Source: Adapted from Bond WW, Ott BJ, Franke K, McCracken JE. Effective use of liquid chemical germicides on medical devices; instrument design problems. In: Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization and preservation. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Gebiger, 1991:1100. References A-4.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Parts 152, 156, and A-1.Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and US Environmental Pro- 158. Exemption of certain pesticide substances from federal insecti- tection Agency (EPA). Memorandum of understanding between the cide, fungicide, and rodenticide act requirements. Amended 1996. FDA and EPA: notice regarding matters of mutual responsibility— Federal Register 1996;61:8876–9. regulation of liquid chemical germicides intended for use on medical A-5.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- devices. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Ser- tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne vices, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, US pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries; final rule. Federal Environmental Protection Agency, 1993. Register 2001;66:5317–25. As amended from and includes 29 CFR A-2.Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Interim measures for registra- Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens; tion of antimicrobial products/liquid chemical germicides with medi- final rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64174–82. Available at http://www. cal device use claims under the memorandum of understanding between osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html. EPA and FDA. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and A-6.Spaulding EH. Role of chemical disinfection in preventing nosoco- Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1994. mial infections. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on A-3.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA Nosocomial Infections, 1970. Brachman PS, Eickhoff TC, eds. Chi- reviewers: content and format of premarket notification [510(k)] sub- cago, IL: American Hospital Association, 1971:247–54. missions for liquid chemical sterilants/high level disinfectants. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 2000. Available at http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/ 397.pdf. Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 65 Appendix B Immunizations Strongly Recommended for Health-Care Personnel (HCP) Major precautions Vaccine Dose schedule Indications and contraindications Special considerations Hepatitis B Three-dose schedule Health-care personnel (HCP) History of anaphylactic reaction to No therapeutic or adverse effects on hepatitis recombinant administered intramuscularly at risk for exposure to blood common baker’s yeast. Pregnancy B virus (HBV)-infected persons; cost- vaccine* (IM) in the deltoid; 0,1,6 - and body fluids. is not a contraindication. effectiveness of prevaccination screening for second dose administered 1 susceptibility to HBV depends on costs of month after first dose; third dose vaccination and antibody testing and administered 4 months after prevalence of immunity in the group of second. Booster doses are not potential vaccinees; health-care personnel who necessary for persons who have have ongoing contact with patients or blood developed adequate antibodies should be tested 1–2 months after completing to hepatitis B surface antigen the vaccination series to determine serologic (anti-HBs). response. If vaccination does not induce adequate anti-HBs (>10 mIU/mL), a second vaccine series should be administered. Influenza Annual single-dose vaccination HCP who have contact with History of anaphylactic hypersensi- Recommended for women who will be in the vaccine IM with current vaccine. patients at high risk or who tivity to eggs or to other compo- second or third trimesters of pregnancy during (inactivated)¶ work in chronic-care facilities; nents of the vaccine. the influenza season and women in any stage HCP aged >50 years or who of pregnancy who have chronic medical have high-risk medical conditions that are associated with an conditions. increased risk of influenza.§ Measles live- One dose administered HCP who were born during or Pregnancy; immunocompromised† Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) is the virus vaccine subcutaneously (SC); second after 1957 without documenta- state (including human immunode- recommended vaccine, if recipients are also dose >4 weeks later. tion of 1) receipt of 2 doses of ficiency virus [HIV]-infected likely to be susceptible to rubella or mumps; live vaccine on or after their first persons with severe immunosup- persons vaccinated during 1963–1967 with birthday, 2) physician-diagnosed pression); history of anaphylactic 1) measles killed-virus vaccine alone, measles, or 3) laboratory reactions after gelatin ingestion or 2) killed-virus vaccine followed by live-virus evidence of immunity. Vaccine receipt of neomycin; or recent vaccine, or 3) a vaccine of unknown type, should also be considered for receipt of antibody-containing should be revaccinated with two doses of all HCP who have no proof of blood products. live-virus measles vaccine. immunity, including those born before 1957. Mumps live- One dose SC; no booster. HCP believed susceptible can Pregnancy; immunocompromised† MMR is the recommended vaccine. virus vaccine be vaccinated; adults born state; history of anaphylactic before 1957 can be considered reaction after gelatin ingestion or immune. receipt of neomycin. Rubella live- One dose SC; no booster. HCP, both male and female, Pregnancy; immunocompromised† Women pregnant when vaccinated or who virus vaccine who lack documentation of state; history of anaphylactic become pregnant within 4 weeks of receipt of live vaccine on or reaction after receipt of neomycin. vaccination should be counseled regarding after their first birthday, or lack theoretic risks to the fetus; however, the risk of laboratory evidence of of rubella vaccine-associated malformations immunity can be vaccinated. among these women is negligible. MMR is the Adults born before 1957 can recommended vaccine. be considered immune, except women of childbearing age. Varicella-zoster Two 0.5 mL doses SC 4–8 HCP without reliable history of Pregnancy; immunocompromised† Because 71%–93% of U.S.-born persons live-virus weeks apart if aged >13 years. varicella or laboratory evidence state; history of anaphylactic without a history of varicella are immune, vaccine of varicella immunity. reaction after receipt of neomycin serologic testing before vaccination might be or gelatin; recent receipt of cost-effective. antibody-containing blood products; salicylate use should be avoided for 6 weeks after vaccination. Sources: Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control 1998;26:289–354. CDC. Immunization of health-care workers: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and the Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 1997;46(No. RR-18). CDC. Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2003;52:1-34. CDC. Using live, attenuated influenza vaccine for prevention and control of influenza: supplemental recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 2003;52(No. RR-13). *A federal standard issued in December 1991 under the Occupational Safety and Health Act mandates that hepatitis B vaccine be made available at the employer’s expense to all HCP occupationally exposed to blood or other potentially infectious materials. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration requires that employers make available hepatitis B vaccinations, evaluations, and follow-up procedures in accordance with current CDC recommendations. † Persons immunocompromised because of immune deficiencies, HIV infection, leukemia, lymphoma, generalized malignancy; or persons receiving immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids, alkylating drugs, antimetabolites; or persons receiving radiation. § Vaccination of pregnant women after the first trimester might be preferred to avoid coincidental association with spontaneous abortions, which are most common during the first trimester. However, no adverse fetal effects have been associated with influenza vaccination. ¶ A live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) is FDA-approved for healthy persons aged 5-49 years. Because of the possibility of transmission of vaccine viruses from recipients of LAIV to other persons and in the absence of data on the risk of illness and among immunocompromised persons infected with LAIV viruses, the inactivated influenza vaccine is preferred for HCP who have close contact with immunocompromised persons. 66 MMWR December 19, 2003 Appendix C Methods for Sterilizing and Disinfecting Patient-Care Items and Environmental Surfaces* Health-care application Type of Environmental Process Result Method Examples patient-care item surfaces Sterilization Destroys all microorgan- Heat-automated Not applicable isms, including bacterial High temperature Steam, dry heat, unsaturated chemical vapor Heat-tolerant critical spores. and semicritical Low temperature Ethylene oxide gas, plasma sterilization Heat-sensitive critical and semicritical Liquid immersion† Chemical sterilants. Glutaraldehyde, Heat-sensitive critical glutaraldehydes with phenol, hydrogen and semicritical peroxide, hydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid, peracetic acid High-level Destroys all microorgan- Heat-automated Washer-disinfector Heat-sensitive Not applicable disinfection isms, but not necessarily semicritical high numbers of bacterial spores. Liquid immersion† Chemical sterilants/high-level disinfectants. Glutaraldehyde, glutaraldehyde with phenol, hydrogen peroxide, hydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid, ortho-phthalaldehyde Intermediate- Destroys vegetative bacteria Liquid contact U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)- Noncritical with visible Clinical contact level and the majority of fungi and registered hospital disinfectant with label claim blood surfaces; blood disinfection viruses. Inactivates of tuberculocidal activity (e.g., chlorine- spills on Mycobacterium bovis.§ Not containing products, quaternary ammonium housekeeping necessarily capable of killing compounds with alcohol, phenolics, iodophors, surfaces bacterial spores. EPA-registered chlorine-based product¶) Low-level Destroys the majority of Liquid contact EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with no Noncritical without Clinical contact disinfection vegetative bacteria, certain label claim regarding tuberculocidal activity.** visible blood surfaces; fungi, and viruses. Does not The Occupational Safety and Health Administra- housekeeping inactivate Mycobacterium tion also requires label claims of human surfaces bovis .§ immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV) potency for clinical contact surfaces (e.g., quaternary ammonium compounds, some phenolics, some iodophors) * EPA and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulate chemical germicides used in health-care settings. FDA regulates chemical sterilants used on critical and semicritical medical devices, and the EPA regulates gaseous sterilants and liquid chemical disinfectants used on noncritical surfaces. FDA also regulates medical devices, including sterilizers. More information is available at 1) http://www.epa.gov/oppad001/chemregindex.htm, 2) http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/index.html, and 3) http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/ germlab.html. † Contact time is the single critical variable distinguishing the sterilization process from high-level disinfection with FDA-cleared liquid chemical sterilants. FDA defines a high-level disinfectant as a sterilant used under the same contact conditions as sterilization except for a shorter immersion time (C-1). § The tuberculocidal claim is used as a benchmark to measure germicidal potency. Tuberculosis (TB) is transmitted via the airborne route rather than by environmental surfaces and, accordingly, use of such products on environmental surfaces plays no role in preventing the spread of TB. Because mycobacteria have among the highest intrinsic levels of resistance among vegetative bacteria, viruses, and fungi, any germicide with a tuberculocidal claim on the label (i.e., an intermediate-level disinfectant) is considered capable of inactivating a broad spectrum of pathogens, including much less resistant organisms, including bloodborne pathogens (e.g., HBV, hepatitis C virus [HCV], and HIV). It is this broad-spectrum capability, rather than the product’s specific potency against mycobacteria, that is the basis for protocols and regulations dictating use of tuberculocidal chemicals for surface disinfection. ¶ Chlorine-based products that are EPA-registered as intermediate-level disinfectants are available commercially. In the absence of an EPA-registered chlorine-based product, a fresh solution of sodium hypochlorite (e.g., household bleach) is an inexpensive and effective intermediate-level germicide. Concentrations ranging from 500 ppm to 800 ppm of chlorine (1:100 dilution of 5.25% bleach and tap water, or approximately ¼ cup of 5.25% bleach to 1 gallon of water) are effective on environmental surfaces that have been cleaned of visible contamination. Appropriate personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves and goggles) should be worn when preparing hypochlorite solutions (C-2,C-3). Caution should be exercised, because chlorine solutions are corrosive to metals, especially aluminum. ** Germicides labeled as “hospital disinfectant” without a tuberculocidal claim pass potency tests for activity against three representative microorganisms: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and Salmonella choleraesuis. References pathogens; needlesticks and other sharps injuries; final rule. Federal C-1.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA Register 2001;66:5317–25. As amended from and includes 29 CFR reviewers: content and format of premarket notification [510(k)] sub- Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens; fi- missions for liquid chemical sterilants/high level disinfectants. Rockville, nal rule. Federal Register 1991;56:64174–82. Available at http://www. MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug osha.gov/SLTC/dentistry/index.html. Administration, 2000. Available at http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ode/ C-3.CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care 397.pdf. facilities: recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Con- C-2.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis- trol Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). MMWR 2003;52(No. tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne RR-10). Vol. 52 / RR-17 Recommendations and Reports 67 68 MMWR December 19, 2003 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report Recommendations and Reports December 19, 2003 / Vol. 52 / No. RR-17 Continuing Education Activity Sponsored by CDC Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care Settings — 2003 EXPIRATION — December 19, 2006 You must complete and return the response form electronically or by mail by credit. If you return the form electronically, you will receive educational credit December 19, 2006, to receive continuing education credit. If you immediately. If you mail the form, you will receive educational credit in answer all of the questions, you will receive an award letter for 2.0 hours approximately 30 days. No fees are charged for participating in this continuing Continuing Medical Education (CME) credit; 0.2 Continuing Education education activity. Units (CEUs); or 2.2 contact hours Continuing Nursing Education (CNE) INSTRUCTIONS By Internet By Mail or Fax 1. Read this MMWR (Vol. 52, RR-17), which contains the correct answers to 1. Read this MMWR (Vol. 52, RR-17), which contains the correct answers to the questions beginning on the next page. the questions beginning on the next page. 2. Go to the MMWR Continuing Education Internet site at <http:// 2. Complete all registration information on the response form, including your www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted.html>. name, mailing address, phone number, and e-mail address, if available. 3. Select which exam you want to take and select whether you want to register 3. Indicate whether you are registering for CME, CEU, or CNE credit. for CME, CEU, or CNE credit. 4. Select your answers to the questions, and mark the corresponding letters on 4. Fill out and submit the registration form. the response form. To receive continuing education credit, you must 5. Select exam questions. To receive continuing education credit, you must answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer will instruct you to “Indicate all that apply.” will instruct you to “Indicate all that apply.” 5. Sign and date the response form or a photocopy of the form and send no 6. Submit your answers no later than December 19, 2006. later than December 19, 2006, to 7. Immediately print your Certificate of Completion for your records. Fax: 404-639-4198 Mail:MMWR CE Credit Office of Scientific and Health Communications Epidemiology Program Office, MS C-08 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1600 Clifton Rd, N.E. Atlanta, GA 30333 6. Your Certificate of Completion will be mailed to you within 30 days. ACCREDITATION Continuing Medical Education (CME). CDC is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) to provide continuing medical education for physicians. CDC designates this educational activity for a maximum of 2.0 hours in category 1 credit toward the AMA Physician’s Recognition Award. Each physician should claim only those hours of credit that he/she actually spent in the educational activity. Continuing Education Unit (CEU). CDC has been approved as an authorized provider of continuing education and training programs by the International Association for Continuing Education and Training and awards 0.2 Continuing Education Units (CEUs). Continuing Nursing Education (CNE). This activity for 2.2 contact hours is provided by CDC, which is accredited as a provider of continuing education in nursing by the American Nurses Credentialing Center’s Commission on Accreditation. CCCCCeeeeennnnnttttteeeeerrrrrsssss fffffooooorrrrr DDDDDiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee CCCCCooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll aaaaannnnnddddd PPPPPrrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn SSSSSAAAAAFFFFFEEEEERRRRR (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)•(cid:127) HHHHHEEEEEAAAAALLLLLTTTTTHHHHHIIIIIEEEEERRRRR (cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127)(cid:127) PPPPPEEEEEOOOOOPPPPPLLLLLEEEEETM CE-2 MMWR December 19, 2003 Goal and Objectives This MMWR provides recommendations regarding infection control practices for dentistry settings. These recommendations were prepared by CDC staff after consultation with staff from other federal agencies and specialists in dental infection control. The goal of this report is to minimize the risk of disease transmission in dental health-care settings through improved understanding and practice of evidence-based infection control strategies. Upon completion of this continuing education activity, the reader should be able to 1) list the major components of a personnel health infection-control program in the dental setting; 2) list key measures for preventing transmission of bloodborne pathogens; 3) describe key elements of instrument processing and sterilization; 4) describe dental water quality concepts; and 5) demonstrate the importance of developing an infection-control program evaluation. To receive continuing education credit, please answer all of the following questions. 1. The components of a personnel health infection control program 7. Which of the following statements is true regarding monitoring the in a dental setting should include which of the following? correct functioning of a sterilizer? A. Infection control education and training for dental staff. A. A chemical indicator should be placed in a visible area of the package B. Appropriate immunizations against vaccine-preventable diseases. before sterilization processing. C. Exposure prevention and postexposure management strategies. B. A biological indicator spore test should be processed through a sterilizer D. Policies regarding work-related illness and work restrictions. cycle at least once a week. E. Confidentiality of work-related medical evaluations for dental staff. C. A biological indicator control test matching the same lot of the spore F. All of the above. test should be submitted with the sterilizer spore test. D. Mechanical assessments of sterilizer cycle time and temperature should 2. Which of the following is true regarding standard infection-control be monitored. precautions? E. All of the above. A. Standard precautions are strategies used to reduce the risk of transmission of pathogens in the health-care setting. 8. Low- to intermediate–level disinfectants used to clean environmental surfaces . . . (Indicate all that apply.) B. Standard precautions should be used in caring for all patients, regardless of their infectious status. A. rapidly inactivate human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B C. Expanded or transmission-based precautions are used beyond virus on clinical contact and housekeeping surfaces. standard precautions to interrupt the spread of certain pathogens. B. must be FDA-registered. D. Standard precautions apply to exposure to blood, all body fluids and C. are used after prompt removal of blood or body substance secretions (except sweat), nonintact skin, and mucous membranes. contamination on a surface. E. All of the above. D. are appropriate to disinfect floors, depending on type of contamination. F. None of the above. E. all of the above. F. A, C, and D are correct. 3. Factors to consider in assessing need for follow-up after an occupational blood or body fluid exposure include . . . 9. Which of the following statements is true regarding dental unit A. the type of exposure. waterlines? B. the type of body fluid. A. If municipal water is the source that enters the dental unit waterline, C. the bloodborne pathogen infection status of the source. output will always meet drinking water quality. D. the susceptibility of the exposed person. B. Flushing the waterlines for >2 minutes at the beginning of the day E. all of the above. reduces the biofilm in the waterlines. F. none of the above. C. Dentists should consult with the manufacturer of the dental unit or water delivery system to determine the best method for maintaining 4. Which of the following is not usually worn as personal protective optimal water quality. equipment when anticipating spatter of blood or body fluids? D. Dental unit waterlines can reliably deliver optimal water quality when A. Jacket with long sleeves. used for irrigation during a surgical procedure. B. Gloves. E. All of the above. C. Head covering. F. A, B, and D are correct. D. Protective eyewear or face shield. 10.Which of the following is true regarding a dental clinic infection E. Face mask. control program evaluation? 5. Which of the following is not true regarding gloves? A. A method to ensure a safe working environment should be in place to reduce the risk of health-care–associated infections among patients A. Certain hand lotions can affect the integrity of gloves. and occupational exposures among dental health-care personnel. B. Wearing gloves replaces the need for handwashing. B. Evaluation of a program should include documenting periodic C. Sterile surgical gloves are recommended for oral surgical procedures. observational assessments, reviewing completed checklists, and D. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has identified glove failure reviewing occupational exposures. rates for manufacturers. C. An evaluation program does not improve an infection control program. E. Certain glove materials can interfere with the setting of impression D. A and B are correct. materials. E. A and C are correct. 6. Which of the following statements regarding processing of contaminated F. All of the above. instruments is true? 11.Indicate your work setting. A. Instruments should be processed in an area separate from where clean A. Private dental practice. instruments are stored. B. Hospital dental setting. B. Personnel should wear heavy-duty utility gloves. C. Academic institution. C. Instruments only need cleaning if they have visible contamination. D. Laboratory. D. Instruments should be heat-sterilized unless they are heat-sensitive. E. Other public health setting. E. Cleaning an instrument precedes all sterilization and disinfection processes. F. Other. F. A, B, D, and E are correct. Vol. 52 / No. RR-17 Recommendations and Reports CE-3 Detach or photocopy. tiderC noitacudE gniunitnoC rof mroF esnopseR RWMM 71-RR .oN/25 .loV/3002 ,91 rebmeceD latneD ni lortnoC noitcefnI rof senilediuG 3002 — sgnitteS eraC-htlaeH 12.Which best describes your professional activities? 17.After reading this report, I am confident I can list key measures for A. Dentist. D. Dental office staff. preventing transmission of bloodborne pathogens. B. Dental hygienist. E. Other medical profession. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. C. Dental laboratory staff. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. 13.I plan to use these recommendations as the basis for . . . (Indicate all that apply.) 18.After reading this report, I am confident I can describe key elements of A. health education materials. D. public policy. instrument processing and sterilization. B. insurance reimbursement policies. E. other. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. C. local practice guidelines. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. 14.Each month, approximately how many dental patients do you treat? A. None. D. 51–100. 19.After reading this report, I am confident I can describe dental water B. 1–10. E. 101–200. quality concepts. C. 11–50. F. >200. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. 15.How much time did you spend reading this report and completing the C. Neither agree nor disagree. exam? A. <2.0 hours. C. >3.0 hours but <4.0. 20.After reading this report, I am confident I can demonstrate the importance B. >2.0 hours but <3.0 hours. D. >4.0 hours. of developing an infection-control program evaluation. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. 16.After reading this report, I am confident I can list the major B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. components of a personnel health infection control program in the C. Neither agree nor disagree. dental setting. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. 21.The objectives are relevant to the goal of this report. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. tsum uoy ,tiderc noitacude gniunitnoc eviecer oT ;noitamrofni tcatnoc ruoy edivorp.1 ;tiderc ENC ro ,UEC ,EMC fo eciohc ruoy etacidni.2 ;snoitseuq tset eht fo lla rewsna.3 ;ypocotohp a ro mrof siht etad dna ngis.4 .6002 ,91 rebmeceD yb mrof rewsna ruoy timbus.5 ro yaled a ni tluser nac smeti eseht etelpmoc ot eruliaF .tiderc noitacude gniunitnoc rof noitacilppa ruoy fo noitcejer enO kcehC emaN tsriF emaN tsaL tiderC EMC tiderC UEC xoB .O.P ro sserddA teertS tiderC ENC etiuS ro tnemtrapA edoC PIZ etatS ytiC rebmuN xaF rebmuN enohP sserddA liaM-E lla rewsna tsum uoy ,rebmemeR .srewsna ruoy etacidni ot skcolb etairporppa eht ni lliF !tiderc noitacude gniunitnoc eviecer ot snoitseuq eht fo D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .51 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .1 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .61 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .2 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .71 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .3 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .81 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .4 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .91 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .5 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .02 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .6 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .12 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .7 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .22 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .8 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .32 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .9 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .42 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .01 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .52 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .11 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .62 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .21 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .72 E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .31 F ] [ E ] [ D ] [ C ] [ B ] [ A ] [ .41 maxE detelpmoC I etaD erutangiS (Continued on pg CE-4) CE-4 MMWR December 19, 2003 22.The teaching strategies used in this report (text, figures, boxes, and 25.The content of this activity was appropriate for my educational needs. tables) were useful. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. 26.The availability of continuing education credit influenced my 23.Overall, the presentation of the report enhanced my ability to decision to read this report. understand the material. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree. 27.How did you learn about this continuing education activity? 24.These recommendations will affect my practice. A. Internet. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Advertisement (e.g., fact sheet, MMWR cover, newsletter, or journal). B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Coworker/supervisor. C. Neither agree nor disagree. D. Conference presentation. E. MMWR subscription. F. Other. o rig i nal: adj (cid:127) (cid:127) (cid:127) - - - (e ' r i j e n e l ) 1 : being the first instance or source from which a copy, reproduction, or translation can be made; see also MMWR. YOo g r q hi k a Nu i , b oC i n e It e , M b ol i ee Pl ( t r s i n y A p e i n a si n , n C ne os l o r w a af e k n o n e i i e n , b a s t s i l p e t c s ty , a y , d a o3 s Ih o t, n Ih l mo o n – i a v r n t J a d o a aW t c n t ha 8u a n a d n v n c e a n n T d 8 e L , l , e o u i d d a y dN s e ia e o M D i. F (cid:0) a y b r d v P n x s 2 r u , V i e 2 il e t i i a A en e a i n ( o 9t d i S p a h i D e 6 (cid:1) s s n s n d , i s T r r i n m . o e t e e ) o s 3 i n s n n5 M i = r u . h n i r a e u (cid:2) n d )a 6 i s r i f e 2 oo s D n D , r x o c c o t s e o m e a , y 8s a i n h n a i t e a a p t (cid:3) c r n U , s d l pu s i s 1 h n s e o v D s g t o s o sD l g w ( e o , pr G i, e (cid:1) ) e t d a a o a n n n r f n o0 i f . r (W u i s d r be c n n t t t 2 a g = e, i n n7 C t t F e h h i (cid:4) r h r r a o k c i d g 0 h i o 7 e h t d e N 6 i a = i n et N e u t m o r o w n e v 0 e r e c Ta 1 ; 2 (cid:5) r a r a f e fs g a tl o e e g 2 e o de oV r d v ) 0 u t 9e e d a (cid:0) h la j d r i n p r (cid:6) o , o r u , d f n e t ea , u a e 0 m n t 8 (cid:7) i t e c t t o m M r a h (cid:1) s T , r t p e ab h ; 2 ir d s S C h y e i d r n r b a b W r e (cid:8) ) ,e o i s c I , t s -t e t W i (cid:2) e r it t , D 1 d f x eo i l ha M r ep c o W 4 s r p h d p a e o a l c (cid:4) a e t 2 i sN s e d l k i e (cid:3) t a o 2 . c ro c a s s e e o u f i n s e n p a i t e o , n s t N t s s k d , 5 f r s r (cid:6) hs i V m m l o (cid:4) e i s eo i n t ir w l t s (cid:9) 4 t a o d o o t i a l a o r e i i o V r t p n n w k i W s s 2 b e ts ts n n s v e W (cid:5) t i d o vm f f u a e , s (cid:5) d np d e i (cid:10) I ip e l l s s i e s (cid:5) i n , s h a a m o s y l 1 t f N i i (cid:5) f C (cid:6) p e K o V b s l a L nr a h e ( g ow e S c (cid:5) 1 h r ( i p o s A r m n ( e (cid:5) c D o V e (cid:1) d no ok n r o i 2 (cid:5) up F e t i m e r t s n s o a n l (cid:7) u cs u , = o e - r i g a n a e me C i a (cid:11) 8 v f o o t p e t s h i gd N r t 2 i i b s r g f u s e 3 a n (cid:3) 2 h s i n n A r o , i u u a r 8 i a e z t r t o i c e (cid:5) 4 e N a o 7 i n s v a fr m e u m h l e ) (cid:1) a ( p kD r w h d n i a r e w m n e s , p n s a g t (cid:1) ) r yo o o b a a r a c a i t T , Wo d i n (cid:8) o o u a a , = v J s 1 v a r m , a t n l l N ( k u (cid:6) e e sg f i r s te h eF t (cid:9) e o G s ) 1 n L (cid:0) e o e t t x r e e o e g Je ; c e e l 5 en s s 8 n = da o u d s b (cid:7) mo d e 7 s h t 1 r a w t e d 5 ,8 s a 3 e (cid:8) 4 s o u , l e r , s a y V 2 N f yo N , o ) d 7 A i (cid:10) ee a 0 ( r h , r i t a 2 i d y m . f s n (cid:2) - T ns o s l n a (cid:3) e 3 ) i a r i e 0 l e is - M a l , a W , m = b ea W n v D 1 r w e w o t a f 0 , r (cid:4) M d (cid:3) 4 nn 1r a e o r – e 5 s u v 2 i o u d 4 s Nt - q J 2 a Y N p N t A (cid:5) i (cid:4) o 9 b . i e u m h r , (cid:5) 7r u s o ) s o ( (cid:5) s u u i V 6 n i V E , s r r (cid:6) i r (cid:8) r ( n r i L l s g a t 9 d L k a e d (cid:5) t T s a 6 - 6 A o (cid:5) g n e u n s ( a b 9 e 6 b s o (cid:12) o (cid:5) 1 8 0 i W d s g a (cid:11) s d 8 p p o u a 0 c 8 % s 6 t td (cid:6) u e i n 6 op or i f h (cid:11) (cid:3) 8 I t N : 7 s a 6 r d N d c o i l ) i e i i c 4 o , t l I P 8 i (cid:12) - ( V l s i v (cid:2) N r o o O a m a r s n - b i 3 os H a r t . t i ) S (cid:11) i y = u t a i C t w e y (cid:13) i a c u C t o I * s r m t d2 e a D y s (cid:8) u b O i s m y t A e h 3 t (cid:6) O , s n n a r r E e a (cid:14) i ri s (cid:3) e a ) v l d l l Dt t lu , d l — a a a o a e n e o y o - t (cid:4) o T h i k s n b f M f l R a R g , o l n dr o A a (cid:1) a e an s e oo n f n u J , U a bd a d d , T d (cid:15) g c 2d i a k u e F e F u e n 0 L l (cid:1) s lo o a s n r eo 0 M f t s l r i — ar k (cid:2) 2e S 7 t i u d d m a R e , (cid:3) C a o a e l 2 U i P m a , d F am 0 o (cid:10) n r r J I l o A 0 i (cid:8) G i u i e s f n y t 2 t mo o S n d eU A e . (cid:2) r n R a e i d n o l R e t n ei 1 l m i n c a ns a 2 i SE ea l ag nl g – 0 — t S W t i , t a1 h C 0e N A u t 2 e A t. Vm r2 o e C0 o A s y aa m us s nc s 0a t t r, y o Wiv , m 2 e l g i p i 2 Nt c y W f a V i e e o 0 J o a s u ni r 0 r nl J u t c yf n e 2 e r a e s i c e a i * d t v l a io t p l i A y n l , e a y o w a 1 u n 7 n D r i d 3 9 k a t t g a i h i , 9 s n n I u 1 i t m l n 9 g r T 2 a i s y f –a b – l e W W 2 t 0 m u c A N 0 t t e V 9 a e R 0 i 0 o s a u d r , c 0 n i t 2 t n i e v g s 2 N it d y — i 0 p u le 0 s o v 2 t ir r u / 7 t s V , ( o W 2 C l D N o . ils 0 u t V mr 5 icb ) 0 ti 1 ao a f 2 c / t , i N vit o y . — 31 know what matters. Weekly MMWR The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of charge in electronic format and on a paid subscription basis for paper copy. To receive an electronic copy each week, send an e-mail message to listserv@listserv.cdc.gov. The body content should read SUBscribe mmwr-toc. Electronic copy also is available from CDC’s World-Wide Web server at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr or from CDC’s file transfer protocol server at ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/publications/mmwr. To subscribe for paper copy, contact Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 202-512-1800. Data in the weekly MMWR are provisional, based on weekly reports to CDC by state health departments. The reporting week concludes at close of business on Friday; compiled data on a national basis are officially released to the public on the following Friday. Address inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop C-08, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30333; telephone 888-232-3228. All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated. All MMWR references are available on the Internet at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr. Use the search function to find specific articles. Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication. ✩ U.S. Government Printing Office: 2004-633-140/4-00056 Region IV ISSN: 1057-5987