Chunk 1:
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Recommendations and Reports December 19, 2003 Vol. 52 No. RR17
Guidelines for Infection Control
in Dental HealthCare Settings 2003

Chunk 2:
INSIDE Continuing Education Examination

Chunk 3:
dddddeeeeepppppaaaaarrrrrtttttmmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt ooooofffff hhhhheeeeeaaaaalllllttttthhhhh aaaaannnnnddddd hhhhhuuuuummmmmaaaaannnnn ssssseeeeerrrrrvvvvviiiiiccccceeeeesssss

Chunk 4:
CCCCCeeeeennnnnttttteeeeerrrrrsssss fffffooooorrrrr DDDDDiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee CCCCCooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll aaaaannnnnddddd PPPPPrrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn

Chunk 5:
MMWR
CONTENTS
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Introduction......................................................................... 1

Chunk 6:
Epidemiology Program Office, Centers for Disease Background......................................................................... 2
Control and Prevention CDC, U.S. Department of

Chunk 7:
Previous Recommendations .............................................. 3
Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333.

Chunk 8:
Selected Definitions.......................................................... 4
Review of Science Related to Dental Infection Control......... 6

Chunk 9:
SUGGESTED CITATION Personnel Health Elements of an InfectionControl

Chunk 10:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines Program.......................................................................... 6

Chunk 11:
for Infection Control in Dental HealthCare Settings Preventing Transmission
 2003. MMWR 200352No. RR17inclusive page of Bloodborne Pathogens................................................ 10

Chunk 12:
numbers. Hand Hygiene ................................................................ 14
Personal Protective Equipment........................................ 16

Chunk 13:
Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity................. 19
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Sterilization and Disinfection of PatientCare Items......... 20

Chunk 14:
Julie L. Gerberding, M.D., M.P.H. Environmental Infection Control ..................................... 25
Director Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality......... 28

Chunk 15:
Special Considerations...................................................... 30
Dixie E. Snider, Jr., M.D., M.P.H.
Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached

Chunk 16:
Acting Deputy Director for Public Health Science
to Air and Waterlines .................................................... 30

Chunk 17:
Susan Y. Chu, Ph.D., M.S.P.H. Saliva Ejectors ................................................................ 31

Chunk 18:
Acting Associate Director for Science Dental Radiology............................................................ 31
Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications ................. 31

Chunk 19:
Epidemiology Program Office
SingleUse or Disposable Devices................................... 32

Chunk 20:
Stephen B. Thacker, M.D., M.Sc. Preprocedural Mouth Rinses ........................................... 32
Director Oral Surgical Procedures................................................ 32

Chunk 21:
Handling of Biopsy Specimens........................................ 33
Office of Scientific and Health Communications
Handling of Extracted Teeth............................................ 33

Chunk 22:
John W. Ward, M.D. Dental Laboratory........................................................... 33
Director LaserElectrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke.............. 34

Chunk 23:
Editor, MMWR Series M. tuberculosis.................................................................35
CreutzfeldtJakob Disease and Other Prion Diseases...... 36
Suzanne M. Hewitt, M.P.A.

Chunk 24:
Program Evaluation ........................................................ 37
Managing Editor, MMWR Series
InfectionControl Research Considerations..................... 38

Chunk 25:
Recommendations............................................................. 39
C. Kay SmithAkin, M.Ed.
InfectionControl Internet Resources ................................. 48

Chunk 26:
Lead Technical WriterEditor
Acknowledgement............................................................. 48

Chunk 27:
C. Kay SmithAkin, M.Ed. References......................................................................... 48

Chunk 28:
Douglas W. Weatherwax Appendix A ....................................................................... 62

Chunk 29:
Project Editors Appendix B........................................................................ 65
Appendix C ....................................................................... 66

Chunk 30:
Beverly J. Holland
Continuing Education Activity .......................................CE1
Lead Visual Information Specialist
Malbea A. LaPete

Chunk 31:
Malbea A. LaPete
Visual Information Specialist For Continuing Dental Education CDE, see httpwww.ada.org.
Kim L. Bright, M.B.A. To request additional copies of this report, contact CDCs Division

Chunk 32:
Quang M. Doan, M.B.A. of Oral Health by email oralhealthcdc.gov telephone 770488
Erica R. Shaver 6054 or fax 7704886080.
Information Technology Specialists
Disclosure of Relationship

Chunk 33:
Our subject matter experts wish to disclose they have no financial
interests or other relationships with the manufacture of commercial

Chunk 34:
products, providers of commercial services, or commercial supporters.
This report does not include any discussion of the unlabeled use of
commercial products or products for investigational use.

Chunk 35:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 1
Guidelines for Infection Control
in Dental HealthCare Settings 2003
Prepared by
William G. Kohn, D.D.S.1
Amy S. Collins, M.P.H.1

Chunk 36:
Jennifer L. Cleveland, D.D.S.1
Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S.2
Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P.3
Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H.1
1Division of Oral Health

Chunk 37:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, CDC
2United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service
Great Lakes, Illinois
3The Forsyth Institute
Boston, Massachusetts

Chunk 38:
Summary
This report consolidates previous recommendations and adds new ones for infection control in dental settings. Recommendations

Chunk 39:
are provided regarding 1 educating and protecting dental healthcare personnel 2 preventing transmission of bloodborne patho

Chunk 40:
gens 3 hand hygiene 4 personal protective equipment 5 contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity 6 sterilization and

Chunk 41:
disinfection of patientcare items 7 environmental infection control 8 dental unit waterlines, biofilm, and water quality and

Chunk 42:
9 special considerations e.g., dental handpieces and other devices, radiology, parenteral medications, oral surgical procedures, and

Chunk 43:
dental laboratories. These recommendations were developed in collaboration with and after review by authorities on infection

Chunk 44:
control from CDC and other public agencies, academia, and private and professional organizations.
Introduction handhygiene products and surgical hand antisepsis

Chunk 45:
cid127 contact dermatitis and latex hypersensitivity
This report consolidates recommendations for preventing
cid127 sterilization of unwrapped instruments

Chunk 46:
and controlling infectious diseases and managing personnel
cid127 dental waterquality concerns e.g., dental unit waterline
health and safety concerns related to infection control in den

Chunk 47:
biofilms delivery of water of acceptable biological quality
tal settings. This report 1 updates and revises previous CDC
for patient care usefulness of flushing waterlines use of

Chunk 48:
recommendations regarding infection control in dental set
sterile irrigating solutions for oral surgical procedures
tings 1,2 2 incorporates relevant infectioncontrol measures

Chunk 49:
handling of community boilwater advisories
from other CDC guidelines and 3 discusses concerns not
cid127 dental radiology
addressed in previous recommendations for dentistry. These

Chunk 50:
cid127 aseptic technique for parenteral medications
updates and additional topics include the following
cid127 preprocedural mouth rinsing for patients

Chunk 51:
cid127 application of standard precautions rather than universal
cid127 oral surgical procedures
precautions
cid127 laserelectrosurgery plumes

Chunk 52:
cid127 work restrictions for healthcare personnel HCP infected
cid127 tuberculosis TB
with or occupationally exposed to infectious diseases
cid127 CreutzfeldtJakob disease CJD and other prionrelated

Chunk 53:
cid127 management of occupational exposures to bloodborne
diseases
pathogens, including postexposure prophylaxis PEP for
cid127 infectioncontrol program evaluation and

Chunk 54:
work exposures to hepatitis B virus HBV, hepatitis C
cid127 research considerations.
virus HCV and human immunodeficiency virus HIV
These guidelines were developed by CDC staff members in

Chunk 55:
cid127 selection and use of devices with features designed to pre
collaboration with other authorities on infection control. Draft
vent sharps injury

Chunk 56:
vent sharps injury
documents were reviewed by other federal agencies and profes
sional organizations from the fields of dental health care, public

Chunk 57:
The material in this report originated in the National Center for Chronic health, and hospital epidemiology and infection control. A Fed

Chunk 58:
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, James S. Marks, M.D., eral Register notice elicited public comments that were consid
M.P.H., Director and the Division of Oral Health, William R. Maas,

Chunk 59:
ered in the decisionmaking process. Existing guidelines and
D.D.S., M.P.H., Director.
published research pertinent to dental infectioncontrol prin
2 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 60:
ciples and practices were reviewed. Wherever possible, recom droplets e.g., spatter containing microorganisms generated

Chunk 61:
mendations are based on data from welldesigned scientific stud from an infected person and propelled a short distance e.g.,

Chunk 62:
ies. However, only a limited number of studies have characterized by coughing, sneezing, or talking and 4 inhalation of air

Chunk 63:
risk factors and the effectiveness of prevention measures for borne microorganisms that can remain suspended in the air
infections associated with dental healthcare practices. for long periods 5.

Chunk 64:
Some infectioncontrol practices routinely used by health Infection through any of these routes requires that all of the

Chunk 65:
care practitioners cannot be rigorously examined for ethical or following conditions be present

Chunk 66:
logistical reasons. In the absence of scientific evidence for such cid127 a pathogenic organism of sufficient virulence and in

Chunk 67:
practices, certain recommendations are based on strong theo adequate numbers to cause disease

Chunk 68:
retical rationale, suggestive evidence, or opinions of respected cid127 a reservoir or source that allows the pathogen to survive

Chunk 69:
authorities based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or and multiply e.g., blood

Chunk 70:
committee reports. In addition, some recommendations are cid127 a mode of transmission from the source to the host

Chunk 71:
derived from federal regulations. No recommendations are cid127 a portal of entry through which the pathogen can enter
offered for practices for which insufficient scientific evidence the host and

Chunk 72:
or lack of consensus supporting their effectiveness exists. cid127 a susceptible host i.e., one who is not immune.
Occurrence of these events provides the chain of infection 6.

Chunk 73:
Effective infectioncontrol strategies prevent disease transmis
Background
sion by interrupting one or more links in the chain.

Chunk 74:
In the United States, an estimated 9 million persons work in Previous CDC recommendations regarding infection con

Chunk 75:
healthcare professions, including approximately 168,000 den trol for dentistry focused primarily on the risk of transmission

Chunk 76:
tists, 112,000 registered dental hygienists, 218,000 dental of bloodborne pathogens among DHCP and patients and use

Chunk 77:
assistants 3, and 53,000 dental laboratory technicians 4. of universal precautions to reduce that risk 1,2,7,8. Univer

Chunk 78:
In this report, dental healthcare personnel DHCP refers to sal precautions were based on the concept that all blood and

Chunk 79:
all paid and unpaid personnel in the dental healthcare setting body fluids that might be contaminated with blood should be

Chunk 80:
who might be occupationally exposed to infectious materials, treated as infectious because patients with bloodborne infec

Chunk 81:
including body substances and contaminated supplies, equip tions can be asymptomatic or unaware they are infected 9,10.

Chunk 82:
ment, environmental surfaces, water, or air. DHCP include Preventive practices used to reduce blood exposures, particu

Chunk 83:
dentists, dental hygienists, dental assistants, dental laboratory larly percutaneous exposures, include 1 careful handling of

Chunk 84:
technicians inoffice and commercial, students and trainees, sharp instruments, 2 use of rubber dams to minimize blood

Chunk 85:
contractual personnel, and other persons not directly involved spattering 3 handwashing and 4 use of protective barriers

Chunk 86:
in patient care but potentially exposed to infectious agents e.g., e.g., gloves, masks, protective eyewear, and gowns.

Chunk 87:
administrative, clerical, housekeeping, maintenance, or vol The relevance of universal precautions to other aspects of

Chunk 88:
unteer personnel. Recommendations in this report are disease transmission was recognized, and in 1996, CDC

Chunk 89:
designed to prevent or reduce potential for disease transmis expanded the concept and changed the term to standard pre

Chunk 90:
sion from patient to DHCP, from DHCP to patient, and from cautions. Standard precautions integrate and expand the ele

Chunk 91:
patient to patient. Although these guidelines focus mainly on ments of universal precautions into a standard of care designed

Chunk 92:
outpatient, ambulatory dental healthcare settings, the recom to protect HCP and patients from pathogens that can be spread

Chunk 93:
mended infectioncontrol practices are applicable to all set by blood or any other body fluid, excretion, or secretion 11.

Chunk 94:
tings in which dental treatment is provided. Standard precautions apply to contact with 1 blood 2 all

Chunk 95:
Dental patients and DHCP can be exposed to pathogenic body fluids, secretions, and excretions except sweat, regard

Chunk 96:
microorganisms including cytomegalovirus CMV, HBV, less of whether they contain blood 3 nonintact skin and 4

Chunk 97:
HCV, herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, HIV, Mycobacte mucous membranes. Saliva has always been considered a

Chunk 98:
rium tuberculosis, staphylococci, streptococci, and other viruses potentially infectious material in dental infection control thus,

Chunk 99:
and bacteria that colonize or infect the oral cavity and respira no operational difference exists in clinical dental practice

Chunk 100:
tory tract. These organisms can be transmitted in dental set between universal precautions and standard precautions.

Chunk 101:
tings through 1 direct contact with blood, oral fluids, or other In addition to standard precautions, other measures e.g.,

Chunk 102:
patient materials 2 indirect contact with contaminated expanded or transmissionbased precautions might be neces

Chunk 103:
objects e.g., instruments, equipment, or environmental sur sary to prevent potential spread of certain diseases e.g., TB,

Chunk 104:
faces 3 contact of conjunctival, nasal, or oral mucosa with influenza, and varicella that are transmitted through airborne,
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 3

Chunk 105:
droplet, or contact transmission e.g., sneezing, coughing, and commitment and accountability of all DHCP. This report is

Chunk 106:
contact with skin 11. When acutely ill with these diseases, designed to provide guidance to DHCP for preventing disease

Chunk 107:
patients do not usually seek routine dental outpatient care. transmission in dental healthcare settings, for promoting a safe

Chunk 108:
Nonetheless, a general understanding of precautions for dis working environment, and for assisting dental practices in

Chunk 109:
eases transmitted by all routes is critical because 1 some DHCP developing and implementing infectioncontrol programs. These

Chunk 110:
are hospitalbased or work parttime in hospital settings programs should be followed in addition to practices and pro

Chunk 111:
2 patients infected with these diseases might seek urgent treat cedures for worker protection required by the Occupational

Chunk 112:
ment at outpatient dental offices and 3 DHCP might Safety and Health Administrations OSHA standards for

Chunk 113:
become infected with these diseases. Necessary transmission occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens 13,

Chunk 114:
based precautions might include patient placement e.g., iso including instituting controls to protect employees from

Chunk 115:
lation, adequate room ventilation, respiratory protection e.g., exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials

Chunk 116:
N95 masks for DHCP, or postponement of nonemergency OPIM, and requiring implementation of a written exposure
dental procedures. control plan, annual employee training, HBV vaccinations, and

Chunk 117:
DHCP should be familiar also with the hierarchy of con postexposure followup 13. Interpretations and enforcement

Chunk 118:
trols that categorizes and prioritizes prevention strategies 12. procedures are available to help DHCP apply this OSHA stan

Chunk 119:
For bloodborne pathogens, engineering controls that elimi dard in practice 14. Also, manufacturers Material Safety Data

Chunk 120:
nate or isolate the hazard e.g., punctureresistant sharps con Sheets MSDS should be consulted regarding correct proce

Chunk 121:
tainers or needleretraction devices are the primary strategies dures for handling or working with hazardous chemicals 15.
for protecting DHCP and patients. Where engineering con

Chunk 122:
trols are not available or appropriate, workpractice controls Previous Recommendations
that result in safer behaviors e.g., onehand needle recapping

Chunk 123:
This report includes relevant infectioncontrol measures from
or not using fingers for cheek retraction while using sharp
the following previously published CDC guidelines and rec

Chunk 124:
instruments or suturing, and use of personal protective equip
ommendations
ment PPE e.g., protective eyewear, gloves, and mask can
cid127 CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in

Chunk 125:
prevent exposure 13. In addition, administrative controls
healthcare facilities recommendations of CDC and the
e.g., policies, procedures, and enforcement measures targeted

Chunk 126:
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Commit
at reducing the risk of exposure to infectious persons are a
tee HICPAC. MMWR in press.

Chunk 127:
priority for certain pathogens e.g., M. tuberculosis, particu
cid127 CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in
larly those spread by airborne or droplet routes.

Chunk 128:
healthcare facilities recommendations of CDC and the
Dental practices should develop a written infectioncontrol
Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Commit

Chunk 129:
program to prevent or reduce the risk of disease transmission.
tee HICPAC. MMWR 200352No. RR10.
Such a program should include establishment and implemen

Chunk 130:
cid127 CDC. Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular
tation of policies, procedures, and practices in conjunction
catheterrelated infections. MMWR 200251No. RR10.

Chunk 131:
with selection and use of technologies and products to pre
cid127 CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in healthcare settings
vent workrelated injuries and illnesses among DHCP as well

Chunk 132:
recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control
as healthcareassociated infections among patients. The pro
Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPACSHEA

Chunk 133:
gram should embody principles of infection control and
APICIDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. MMWR 200251
occupational health, reflect current science, and adhere to rel
No. RR16.

Chunk 134:
No. RR16.
evant federal, state, and local regulations and statutes. An
cid127 CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for
infectioncontrol coordinator e.g., dentist or other DHCP

Chunk 135:
the management of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV,
knowledgeable or willing to be trained should be assigned
and HIV and recommendations for postexposure prophy

Chunk 136:
responsibility for coordinating the program. The effectiveness
laxis. MMWR 200150No. RR11.
of the infectioncontrol program should be evaluated on a day

Chunk 137:
cid127 Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis
today basis and over time to help ensure that policies, proce
WR, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Com

Chunk 138:
dures, and practices are useful, efficient, and successful see
mittee. Guideline for prevention of surgical site infection,
Program Evaluation.
1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 19992025078.

Chunk 139:
Although the infectioncontrol coordinator remains respon
cid127 Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML,
sible for overall management of the program, creating and main

Chunk 140:
Shapiro CN, Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control
taining a safe work environment ultimately requires the
Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for infection
4 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 141:
control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Con Bioburden Microbiological load i.e., number of viable
trol 199826289354. organisms in or on an object or surface or organic material on

Chunk 142:
cid127 CDC. Immunization of healthcare workers recommen a surface or object before decontamination, or sterilization.

Chunk 143:
dations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Prac Also known as bioload or microbial load.
tices ACIP and the Hospital Infection Control Practices Colonyforming unit CFU The minimum number i.e.,

Chunk 144:
Advisory Committee HICPAC. MMWR 199746No. tens of millions of separable cells on the surface of or in semi
RR18. solid agar medium that give rise to a visible colony of progeny.

Chunk 145:
cid127 Rutala WA, Association for Professionals in Infection CFUs can consist of pairs, chains, clusters, or as single cells

Chunk 146:
Control and Epidemiology, Inc. APIC guideline for selec and are often expressed as colonyforming units per milliliter
tion and use of disinfectants. Am J Infect Control CFUsmL.

Chunk 147:
19962431342. Decontamination Use of physical or chemical means to
cid127 Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory remove, inactivate, or destroy pathogens on a surface or item

Chunk 148:
Committee. Guideline for isolation precautions in hospi so that they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious

Chunk 149:
tals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996175380. particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling,
cid127 Larson EL, 1992, 1993, and 1994 Guidelines Committee. use, or disposal.

Chunk 150:
APIC guideline for handwashing and hand antisepsis in Dental treatment water Nonsterile water used during dental

Chunk 151:
healthcare settings. Am J Infect Control 19952325169. treatment, including irrigation of nonsurgical operative sites

Chunk 152:
cid127 CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of and cooling of highspeed rotary and ultrasonic instruments.

Chunk 153:
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in healthcare facilities, 1994. Disinfectant A chemical agent used on inanimate objects

Chunk 154:
MMWR 199443No. RR13. e.g., floors, walls, or sinks to destroy virtually all recognized

Chunk 155:
cid127 CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily all microbial

Chunk 156:
human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to forms e.g., bacterial endospores. The U.S. Environmental

Chunk 157:
patients during exposureprone invasive procedures. Protection Agency EPA groups disinfectants on the basis of
MMWR 199140No. RR8. whether the product label claims limited, general, or hospital

Chunk 158:
cid127 Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical disinfectant capabilities.
wound infections, 1985. Supersedes guideline for preven Disinfection Destruction of pathogenic and other kinds of

Chunk 159:
tion of surgical wound infections published in 1982. microorganisms by physical or chemical means. Disinfection

Chunk 160:
Originally published in November 1985. Revised. is less lethal than sterilization, because it destroys the majority

Chunk 161:
Infect Control 19867193200. of recognized pathogenic microorganisms, but not necessarily

Chunk 162:
cid127 Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing all microbial forms e.g., bacterial spores. Disinfection does

Chunk 163:
and hospital environmental control, 1985. Infect Control not ensure the degree of safety associated with sterilization
1986723143. processes.
Droplet nuclei Particles 5 µm in diameter formed by dehy

Chunk 164:
Selected Definitions dration of airborne droplets containing microorganisms that
can remain suspended in the air for long periods of time.
Alcoholbased hand rub An alcoholcontaining preparation

Chunk 165:
Droplets Small particles of moisture e.g., spatter generated
designed for reducing the number of viable microorganisms
when a person coughs or sneezes, or when water is converted
on the hands.

Chunk 166:
on the hands.
to a fine mist by an aerator or shower head. These particles,
Antimicrobial soap A detergent containing an antiseptic agent.
intermediate in size between drops and droplet nuclei, can

Chunk 167:
Antiseptic A germicide used on skin or living tissue for the
contain infectious microorganisms and tend to quickly settle
purpose of inhibiting or destroying microorganisms e.g.,

Chunk 168:
from the air such that risk of disease transmission is usually
alcohols, chlorhexidine, chlorine, hexachlorophene, iodine,
limited to persons in close proximity to the droplet source.

Chunk 169:
chloroxylenol PCMX, quaternary ammonium compounds,
Endotoxin The lipopolysaccharide of gramnegative bacte
and triclosan.
ria, the toxic character of which resides in the lipid protein.

Chunk 170:
Bead sterilizer A device using glass beads 1.21.5 mm
Endotoxins can produce pyrogenic reactions in persons
diameter and temperatures 217ºC232ºC for brief exposures

Chunk 171:
exposed to their bacterial component.
e.g., 45 seconds to inactivate microorganisms. This term is
Germicide An agent that destroys microorganisms, especially

Chunk 172:
actually a misnomer because it has not been cleared by the
pathogenic organisms. Terms with the same suffix e.g., viru
Food and Drug Administration FDA as a sterilizer.

Chunk 173:
cide, fungicide, bactericide, tuberculocide, and sporicide indi
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 5

Chunk 174:
cate agents that destroy the specific microorganism identified Implantable device Device placed into a surgically or natu

Chunk 175:
by the prefix. Germicides can be used to inactivate microor rally formed cavity of the human body and intended to

Chunk 176:
ganisms in or on living tissue i.e., antiseptics or on environ remain there for 30 days.
mental surfaces i.e., disinfectants. Independent water reservoir Container used to hold water or

Chunk 177:
Hand hygiene General term that applies to handwashing, other solutions and supply it to handpieces and air and water

Chunk 178:
antiseptic handwash, antiseptic hand rub, or surgical hand syringes attached to a dental unit. The independent reservoir,
antisepsis. which isolates the unit from the public water system, can be

Chunk 179:
Healthcareassociated infection Any infection associated with provided as original equipment or as a retrofitted device.

Chunk 180:
a medical or surgical intervention. The term healthcare Intermediatelevel disinfection Disinfection process that

Chunk 181:
associated replaces nosocomial, which is limited to adverse inactivates vegetative bacteria, the majority of fungi, myco

Chunk 182:
infectious outcomes occurring in hospitals. bacteria, and the majority of viruses particularly enveloped
Hepatitis B immune globulin HBIG Product used for pro viruses but not bacterial spores.

Chunk 183:
phylaxis against HBV infection. HBIG is prepared from plasma Intermediatelevel disinfectant Liquid chemical germicide

Chunk 184:
containing high titers of hepatitis B surface antibody anti registered with EPA as a hospital disinfectant and with a label

Chunk 185:
HBs and provides protection for 36 mos. claim of potency as tuberculocidal Appendix A.
Hepatitis B surface antigen HBsAg Serologic marker on the Latex Milky white fluid extracted from the rubber tree

Chunk 186:
surface of HBV detected in high levels during acute or chronic Hevea brasiliensis that contains the rubber material cis1,4
hepatitis. The body normally produces antibodies to surface polyisoprene.

Chunk 187:
antigen as a normal immune response to infection. Lowlevel disinfection Process that inactivates the majority

Chunk 188:
Hepatitis B e antigen HBeAg Secreted product of the nucleo of vegetative bacteria, certain fungi, and certain viruses, but

Chunk 189:
capsid gene of HBV found in serum during acute and chronic cannot be relied on to inactivate resistant microorganisms e.g.,

Chunk 190:
HBV infection. Its presence indicates that the virus is replicat mycobacteria or bacterial spores.

Chunk 191:
ing and serves as a marker of increased infectivity. Lowlevel disinfectant Liquid chemical germicide registered

Chunk 192:
Hepatitis B surface antibody antiHBs Protective antibody with EPA as a hospital disinfectant. OSHA requires lowlevel

Chunk 193:
against HBsAg. Presence in the blood can indicate past infec hospital disinfectants also to have a label claim for potency

Chunk 194:
tion with, and immunity to, HBV, or immune response from against HIV and HBV if used for disinfecting clinical contact
hepatitis B vaccine. surfaces Appendix A.

Chunk 195:
Heterotrophic bacteria Those bacteria requiring an organic Microfilter Membrane filter used to trap microorganisms

Chunk 196:
carbon source for growth i.e., deriving energy and carbon from suspended in water. Filters are usually installed on dental unit

Chunk 197:
organic compounds. waterlines as a retrofit device. Microfiltration commonly
Highlevel disinfection Disinfection process that inactivates occurs at a filter pore size of 0.0310 µm. Sediment filters

Chunk 198:
vegetative bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses but not commonly found in dental unit water regulators have pore

Chunk 199:
necessarily high numbers of bacterial spores. FDA further sizes of 2090 µm and do not function as microbiological
defines a highlevel disinfectant as a sterilant used for a shorter filters.

Chunk 200:
contact time. Nosocomial Infection acquired in a hospital as a result of
Hospital disinfectant Germicide registered by EPA for use medical care.

Chunk 201:
on inanimate objects in hospitals, clinics, dental offices, and Occupational exposure Reasonably anticipated skin, eye,

Chunk 202:
other medicalrelated facilities. Efficacy is demonstrated against mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM

Chunk 203:
Salmonella choleraesuis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomo that can result from the performance of an employees duties.
nas aeruginosa. OPIM Other potentially infectious materials. OPIM is an

Chunk 204:
Iatrogenic Induced inadvertently by HCP, medical includ OSHA term that refers to 1 body fluids including semen,

Chunk 205:
ing dental treatment, or diagnostic procedures. Used particu vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural

Chunk 206:
larly in reference to an infectious disease or other complication fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva

Chunk 207:
of treatment. in dental procedures any body fluid visibly contaminated with
Immunization Process by which a person becomes immune, blood and all body fluids in situations where differentiating

Chunk 208:
or protected against a disease. Vaccination is defined as the between body fluids is difficult or impossible 2 any unfixed

Chunk 209:
process of administering a killed or weakened infectious tissue or organ other than intact skin from a human living

Chunk 210:
organism or a toxoid however, vaccination does not always or dead and 3 HIVcontaining cell or tissue cultures, organ
result in immunity.
6 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 211:
cultures HIV or HBVcontaining culture medium or other Review of Science Related
solutions and blood, organs, or other tissues from experimen to Dental Infection Control

Chunk 212:
tal animals infected with HIV or HBV.
Parenteral Means of piercing mucous membranes or skin Personnel Health Elements

Chunk 213:
barrier through such events as needlesticks, human bites, cuts, of an InfectionControl Program
and abrasions.
A protective health component for DHCP is an integral part

Chunk 214:
Persistent activity Prolonged or extended activity that pre
of a dental practice infectioncontrol program. The objectives
vents or inhibits proliferation or survival of microorganisms

Chunk 215:
are to educate DHCP regarding the principles of infection
after application of a product. This activity can be demon
control, identify workrelated infection risks, institute preven

Chunk 216:
strated by sampling a site minutes or hours after application
tive measures, and ensure prompt exposure management and
and demonstrating bacterial antimicrobial effectiveness when

Chunk 217:
medical followup. Coordination between the dental practices
compared with a baseline level. Previously, this property was
infectioncontrol coordinator and other qualified healthcare

Chunk 218:
sometimes termed residual activity.
professionals is necessary to provide DHCP with appropriate
Prion Protein particle lacking nucleic acid that has been

Chunk 219:
services. Dental programs in institutional settings, e.g., hos
implicated as the cause of certain neurodegenerative diseases
pitals, health centers, and educational institutions can coor

Chunk 220:
e.g., scrapie, CJD, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy
dinate with departments that provide personnel health services.
BSE.
However, the majority of dental practices are in ambulatory,

Chunk 221:
Retraction Entry of oral fluids and microorganisms into
private settings that do not have licensed medical staff and
waterlines through negative water pressure.

Chunk 222:
facilities to provide complete onsite health service programs.
Seroconversion The change of a serological test from nega
In such settings, the infectioncontrol coordinator should

Chunk 223:
tive to positive indicating the development of antibodies in
establish programs that arrange for sitespecific infection
response to infection or immunization.

Chunk 224:
control services from external healthcare facilities and pro
Sterile Free from all living microorganisms usually described
viders before DHCP are placed at risk for exposure. Referral

Chunk 225:
as a probability e.g., the probability of a surviving microor
arrangements can be made with qualified healthcare profes
ganism being 1 in 1 million.

Chunk 226:
sionals in an occupational health program of a hospital, with
Sterilization Use of a physical or chemical procedure to
educational institutions, or with healthcare facilities that

Chunk 227:
destroy all microorganisms including substantial numbers of
offer personnel health services.
resistant bacterial spores.

Chunk 228:
Surfactants Surfaceactive agents that reduce surface tension Education and Training
and help cleaning by loosening, emulsifying, and holding soil
Personnel are more likely to comply with an infection

Chunk 229:
in suspension, to be more readily rinsed away.
control program and exposurecontrol plan if they understand
Ultrasonic cleaner Device that removes debris by a process

Chunk 230:
its rationale 5,13,16. Clearly written policies, procedures,
called cavitation, in which waves of acoustic energy are propa
and guidelines can help ensure consistency, efficiency, and

Chunk 231:
gated in aqueous solutions to disrupt the bonds that hold par
effective coordination of activities. Personnel subject to occu
ticulate matter to surfaces.

Chunk 232:
pational exposure should receive infectioncontrol training on
Vaccination See immunization.
initial assignment, when new tasks or procedures affect their

Chunk 233:
Vaccine Product that induces immunity, therefore protect
occupational exposure, and at a minimum, annually 13.
ing the body from the disease. Vaccines are administered

Chunk 234:
Education and training should be appropriate to the assigned
through needle injections, by mouth, and by aerosol.
duties of specific DHCP e.g., techniques to prevent cross

Chunk 235:
Washerdisinfector Automatic unit that cleans and thermally
contamination or instrument sterilization. For DHCP who
disinfects instruments, by using a hightemperature cycle rather

Chunk 236:
perform tasks or procedures likely to result in occupational
than a chemical bath.
exposure to infectious agents, training should include 1 a

Chunk 237:
Wicking Absorption of a liquid by capillary action along a
description of their exposure risks 2 review of prevention strat
thread or through the material e.g., penetration of liquids

Chunk 238:
egies and infectioncontrol policies and procedures 3 discus
through undetected holes in a glove.
sion regarding how to manage workrelated illness and injuries,

Chunk 239:
including PEP and 4 review of work restrictions for the
exposure or infection. Inclusion of DHCP with minimal
exposure risks e.g., administrative employees in education

Chunk 240:
and training programs might enhance facilitywide understand
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 7

Chunk 241:
ing of infectioncontrol principles and the importance of the of workrelated illness and work restrictions if appropriate

Chunk 242:
program. Educational materials should be appropriate in con for exposed or infected DHCP.
tent and vocabulary for each persons educational level, lit
Exposure Prevention and Postexposure

Chunk 243:
eracy, and language, as well as be consistent with existing federal,
Management
state, and local regulations 5,13.
Avoiding exposure to blood and OPIM, as well as protec
Immunization Programs

Chunk 244:
tion by immunization, remain primary strategies for reducing
DHCP are at risk for exposure to, and possible infection occupationally acquired infections, but occupational exposures

Chunk 245:
with, infectious organisms. Immunizations substantially can still occur 19. A combination of standard precautions,

Chunk 246:
reduce both the number of DHCP susceptible to these dis engineering, work practice, and administrative controls is the

Chunk 247:
eases and the potential for disease transmission to other DHCP best means to minimize occupational exposures. Written poli

Chunk 248:
and patients 5,17. Thus, immunizations are an essential part cies and procedures to facilitate prompt reporting, evaluation,

Chunk 249:
of prevention and infectioncontrol programs for DHCP, and counseling, treatment, and medical followup of all occupa

Chunk 250:
a comprehensive immunization policy should be implemented tional exposures should be available to all DHCP. Written

Chunk 251:
for all dental healthcare facilities 17,18. The Advisory Com policies and procedures should be consistent with federal, state,

Chunk 252:
mittee on Immunization Practices ACIP provides national and local requirements addressing education and training,

Chunk 253:
guidelines for immunization of HCP, which includes DHCP postexposure management, and exposure reporting see Pre

Chunk 254:
17. Dental practice immunization policies should incorpo venting Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens.

Chunk 255:
rate current state and federal regulations as well as recommen DHCP who have contact with patients can also be exposed

Chunk 256:
dations from the U.S. Public Health Service and professional to persons with infectious TB, and should have a baseline tu

Chunk 257:
organizations 17 Appendix B. berculin skin test TST, preferably by using a twostep test,

Chunk 258:
On the basis of documented healthcareassociated trans at the beginning of employment 20. Thus, if an unprotected

Chunk 259:
mission, HCP are considered to be at substantial risk for occupational exposure occurs, TST conversions can be distin

Chunk 260:
acquiring or transmitting hepatitis B, influenza, measles, guished from positive TST results caused by previous expo

Chunk 261:
mumps, rubella, and varicella. All of these diseases are vac sures 20,21. The facilitys level of TB risk will determine the

Chunk 262:
cinepreventable. ACIP recommends that all HCP be vacci need for routine followup TSTs see Special Considerations.
nated or have documented immunity to these diseases 5,17.

Chunk 263:
Medical Conditions, WorkRelated Illness,
ACIP does not recommend routine immunization of HCP
and Work Restrictions
against TB i.e., inoculation with bacille CalmetteGuérin vac

Chunk 264:
cine or hepatitis A 17. No vaccine exists for HCV. ACIP DHCP are responsible for monitoring their own health sta

Chunk 265:
guidelines also provide recommendations regarding immuni tus. DHCP who have acute or chronic medical conditions

Chunk 266:
zation of HCP with special conditions e.g., pregnancy, HIV that render them susceptible to opportunistic infection should

Chunk 267:
infection, or diabetes 5,17. discuss with their personal physicians or other qualified

Chunk 268:
Immunization of DHCP before they are placed at risk for authority whether the condition might affect their ability to

Chunk 269:
exposure remains the most efficient and effective use of vac safely perform their duties. However, under certain circum

Chunk 270:
cines in healthcare settings. Some educational institutions and stances, healthcare facility managers might need to exclude

Chunk 271:
infectioncontrol programs provide immunization schedules DHCP from work or patient contact to prevent further trans

Chunk 272:
for students and DHCP. OSHA requires that employers make mission of infection 22. Decisions concerning work restric

Chunk 273:
hepatitis B vaccination available to all employees who have tions are based on the mode of transmission and the period of

Chunk 274:
potential contact with blood or OPIM. Employers are also infectivity of the disease 5 Table 1. Exclusion policies should

Chunk 275:
required to follow CDC recommendations for vaccinations, 1 be written, 2 include a statement of authority that defines

Chunk 276:
evaluation, and followup procedures 13. Nonpatientcare who can exclude DHCP e.g., personal physicians, and 3 be

Chunk 277:
staff e.g., administrative or housekeeping might be included, clearly communicated through education and training. Poli

Chunk 278:
depending on their potential risk of coming into contact with cies should also encourage DHCP to report illnesses or expo

Chunk 279:
blood or OPIM. Employers are also required to ensure that sures without jeopardizing wages, benefits, or job status.

Chunk 280:
employees who decline to accept hepatitis B vaccination sign With increasing concerns regarding bloodborne pathogens and

Chunk 281:
an appropriate declination statement 13. DHCP unable or introduction of universal precautions, use of latex gloves among

Chunk 282:
unwilling to be vaccinated as required or recommended should HCP has increased markedly 7,23. Increased use of these gloves

Chunk 283:
be educated regarding their exposure risks, infectioncontrol has been accompanied by increased reports of allergic reactions

Chunk 284:
policies and procedures for the facility, and the management to natural rubber latex among HCP, DHCP, and patients
8 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 285:
TABLE 1. Suggested work restrictions for healthcare personnel infected with or exposed to major infectious diseases in health
care settings, in the absence of state and local regulations

Chunk 286:
Diseaseproblem Work restriction Duration
Conjunctivitis Restrict from patient contact and contact with patients Until discharge ceases
environment.
Cytomegalovirus infection No restriction

Chunk 287:
Diarrheal disease
Acute stage diarrhea with other symptoms Restrict from patient contact, contact with patients Until symptoms resolve
environment, and foodhandling.

Chunk 288:
Convalescent stage, Salmonella species Restrict from care of patients at high risk. Until symptoms resolve consult with local and state health
authorities regarding need for negative stool cultures

Chunk 289:
Enteroviral infection Restrict from care of infants, neonates, and Until symptoms resolve
immunocompromised patients and their environments.

Chunk 290:
Hepatitis A Restrict from patient contact, contact with patients Until 7 days after onset of jaundice
environment, and foodhanding.
Hepatitis B

Chunk 291:
Hepatitis B
Personnel with acute or chronic hepatitis B No restriction refer to state regulations. Standard
surface antigenemia who do not perform precautions should always be followed.

Chunk 292:
exposureprone procedures
Personnel with acute or chronic hepatitis B Do not perform exposureprone invasive procedures until Until hepatitis B e antigen is negative

Chunk 293:
e antigenemia who perform exposureprone counsel from a review panel has been sought panel
procedures should review and recommend procedures that personnel

Chunk 294:
can perform, taking into account specific procedures as
well as skill and technique. Standard precautions should
always be observed. Refer to state and local regulations
or recommendations.

Chunk 295:
or recommendations.
Hepatitis C No restrictions on professional activity. HCVpositive
healthcare personnel should follow aseptic technique
and standard precautions.
Herpes simplex

Chunk 296:
Herpes simplex
Genital No restriction
Hands herpetic whitlow Restrict from patient contact and contact with patients Until lesions heal
environment.

Chunk 297:
environment.
Orofacial Evaluate need to restrict from care of patients at high risk.
Human immunodeficiency virus personnel who Do not perform exposureprone invasive procedures until

Chunk 298:
perform exposureprone procedures counsel from an expert review panel has been sought
panel should review and recommend procedures that
personnel can perform, taking into account specific

Chunk 299:
procedures as well as skill and technique. Standard
precautions should always be observed. Refer to state
and local regulations or recommendations.
Measles

Chunk 300:
Measles
Active Exclude from duty Until 7 days after the rash appears
Postexposure susceptible personnel Exclude from duty From fifth day after first exposure through twentyfirst day

Chunk 301:
after last exposure, or 4 days after rash appears
Meningococcal infection Exclude from duty Until 24 hours after start of effective therapy
Mumps

Chunk 302:
Mumps
Active Exclude from duty Until 9 days after onset of parotitis
Postexposure susceptible personnel Exclude from duty From twelfth day after first exposure through twentysixth

Chunk 303:
day after last exposure, or until 9 days after onset of
parotitis

Chunk 304:
parotitis
Source Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control
199826289354.

Chunk 305:
199826289354.
Modified from recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ACIP.

Chunk 306:
Unless epidemiologically linked to transmission of infection.

Chunk 307:
Those susceptible to varicella and who are at increased risk of complications of varicella e.g., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age.

Chunk 308:
Patients at high risk as defined by ACIP for complications of influenza.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 9

Chunk 309:
TABLE 1. Continued Suggested work restrictions for healthcare personnel infected with or exposed to major infectious diseases
in healthcare settings, in the absence of state and local regulations

Chunk 310:
Diseaseproblem Work restriction Duration
Pediculosis Restrict from patient contact Until treated and observed to be free of adult and
immature lice
Pertussis

Chunk 311:
Pertussis
Active Exclude from duty From beginning of catarrhal stage through third week
after onset of paroxysms, or until 5 days after start of
effective antibiotic therapy

Chunk 312:
Postexposure asymptomatic personnel No restriction, prophylaxis recommended
Postexposure symptomatic personnel Exclude from duty Until 5 days after start of effective antibiotic therapy
Rubella

Chunk 313:
Rubella
Active Exclude from duty Until 5 days after rash appears
Postexposure susceptible personnel Exclude from duty From seventh day after first exposure through twentyfirst
day after last exposure

Chunk 314:
Staphylococcus aureus infection
Active, draining skin lesions Restrict from contact with patients and patients Until lesions have resolved
environment or food handling.

Chunk 315:
Carrier state No restriction unless personnel are epidemiologically
linked to transmission of the organism

Chunk 316:
Streptococcal infection, group A Restrict from patient care, contact with patients Until 24 hours after adequate treatment started
environment, and foodhandling.
Tuberculosis

Chunk 317:
Tuberculosis
Active disease Exclude from duty Until proved noninfectious
PPD converter No restriction
Varicella chicken pox
Active Exclude from duty Until all lesions dry and crust

Chunk 318:
Postexposure susceptible personnel Exclude from duty From tenth day after first exposure through twentyfirst
day twentyeighth day if varicellazoster immune globulin

Chunk 319:
VZIG administered after last exposure.
Zoster shingles
Localized, in healthy person Cover lesions, restrict from care of patients at high risk Until all lesions dry and crust

Chunk 320:
Generalized or localized in immunosup Restrict from patient contact Until all lesions dry and crust
pressed person

Chunk 321:
pressed person
Postexposure susceptible personnel Restrict from patient contact From tenth day after first exposure through twentyfirst day
twentyeighth day if VZIG administered after last exposure

Chunk 322:
or, if varicella occurs, when lesions crust and dry
Viral respiratory infection, acute febrile Consider excluding from the care of patients at high risk Until acute symptoms resolve

Chunk 323:
or contact with such patients environments during
community outbreak of respiratory syncytial virus and
influenza

Chunk 324:
influenza
Source Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control
199826289354.

Chunk 325:
199826289354.
Modified from recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ACIP.

Chunk 326:
Unless epidemiologically linked to transmission of infection.

Chunk 327:
Those susceptible to varicella and who are at increased risk of complications of varicella e.g., neonates and immunocompromised persons of any age.

Chunk 328:
Patients at high risk as defined by ACIP for complications of influenza.
10 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 329:
2430, as well as increased reports of irritant and allergic con infected blood can result in transmission from patient to

Chunk 330:
tact dermatitis from frequent and repeated use of handhygiene DHCP, from DHCP to patient, and from one patient to

Chunk 331:
products, exposure to chemicals, and glove use. another. The opportunity for transmission is greatest from

Chunk 332:
DHCP should be familiar with the signs and symptoms of patient to DHCP, who frequently encounter patient blood and

Chunk 333:
latex sensitivity 5,3133. A physician should evaluate DHCP bloodcontaminated saliva during dental procedures.

Chunk 334:
exhibiting symptoms of latex allergy, because further exposure Since 1992, no HIV transmission from DHCP to patients

Chunk 335:
could result in a serious allergic reaction. A diagnosis is made has been reported, and the last HBV transmission from DHCP

Chunk 336:
through medical history, physical examination, and diagnos to patients was reported in 1987. HCV transmission from

Chunk 337:
tic tests. Procedures should be in place for minimizing latex DHCP to patients has not been reported. The majority of

Chunk 338:
related health problems among DHCP and patients while DHCP infected with a bloodborne virus do not pose a risk to

Chunk 339:
protecting them from infectious materials. These procedures patients because they do not perform activities meeting the

Chunk 340:
should include 1 reducing exposures to latexcontaining necessary conditions for transmission. For DHCP to pose a

Chunk 341:
materials by using appropriate work practices, 2 training and risk for bloodborne virus transmission to patients, DHCP must

Chunk 342:
educating DHCP, 3 monitoring symptoms, and 4 substitut 1 be viremic i.e., have infectious virus circulating in the blood

Chunk 343:
ing nonlatex products where appropriate 32 see Contact stream 2 be injured or have a condition e.g., weeping der

Chunk 344:
Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity. matitis that allows direct exposure to their blood or other
infectious body fluids and 3 enable their blood or infectious

Chunk 345:
Maintenance of Records, Data Management,
body fluid to gain direct access to a patients wound, trauma
and Confidentiality
tized tissue, mucous membranes, or similar portal of entry.

Chunk 346:
The health status of DHCP can be monitored by maintain Although an infected DHCP might be viremic, unless the sec

Chunk 347:
ing records of workrelated medical evaluations, screening tests, ond and third conditions are also met, transmission cannot
immunizations, exposures, and postexposure management. occur.

Chunk 348:
Such records must be kept in accordance with all applicable The risk of occupational exposure to bloodborne viruses is

Chunk 349:
state and federal laws. Examples of laws that might apply largely determined by their prevalence in the patient popula

Chunk 350:
include the Privacy Rule of the Health Insurance Portability tion and the nature and frequency of contact with blood and

Chunk 351:
and Accountability Act HIPAA of 1996, 45 CFR 160 and body fluids through percutaneous or permucosal routes of

Chunk 352:
164, and the OSHA Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne exposure. The risk of infection after exposure to a bloodborne

Chunk 353:
Pathogens Final Rule 29 CFR 1910.1030h1iiv 34,13. virus is influenced by inoculum size, route of exposure, and

Chunk 354:
The HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to covered entities, includ susceptibility of the exposed HCP 12. The majority of

Chunk 355:
ing certain defined health providers, healthcare clearinghouses, attention has been placed on the bloodborne pathogens HBV,

Chunk 356:
and health plans. OSHA requires employers to ensure that HCV, and HIV, and these pathogens present different levels
certain information contained in employee medical records is of risk to DHCP.

Chunk 357:
1 kept confidential 2 not disclosed or reported without the
Hepatitis B Virus
employees express written consent to any person within or

Chunk 358:
outside the workplace except as required by the OSHA stan HBV is a wellrecognized occupational risk for HCP 36,37.

Chunk 359:
dard and 3 maintained by the employer for at least the dura HBV is transmitted by percutaneous or mucosal exposure to

Chunk 360:
tion of employment plus 30 years. Dental practices that blood or body fluids of a person with either acute or chronic

Chunk 361:
coordinate their infectioncontrol program with offsite pro HBV infection. Persons infected with HBV can transmit the

Chunk 362:
viders might consult OSHAs Bloodborne Pathogen standard virus for as long as they are HBsAgpositive. The risk of HBV

Chunk 363:
and employee Access to Medical and Exposure Records stan transmission is highly related to the HBeAg status of the source

Chunk 364:
dard, as well as other applicable local, state, and federal laws, person. In studies of HCP who sustained injuries from needles

Chunk 365:
to determine a location for storing health records 13,35. contaminated with blood containing HBV, the risk of devel
oping clinical hepatitis if the blood was positive for both HBsAg

Chunk 366:
Preventing Transmission and HBeAg was 2231 the risk of developing serologic
of Bloodborne Pathogens evidence of HBV infection was 3762 19. By compari

Chunk 367:
son, the risk of developing clinical hepatitis from a needle con
Although transmission of bloodborne pathogens e.g., HBV,
taminated with HBsAgpositive, HBeAgnegative blood was

Chunk 368:
HCV, and HIV in dental healthcare settings can have seri
16, and the risk of developing serologic evidence of HBV
ous consequences, such transmission is rare. Exposure to
infection, 2337 38.

Chunk 369:
infection, 2337 38.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 11
Blood contains the greatest proportion of HBV infectious from dentist to patient has not been reported since 1987, pos

Chunk 370:
particle titers of all body fluids and is the most critical vehicle sibly reflecting such factors as 1 adoption of universal precau

Chunk 371:
of transmission in the healthcare setting. HBsAg is also found tions, 2 routine glove use, 3 increased levels of immunity as

Chunk 372:
in multiple other body fluids, including breast milk, bile, cere a result of hepatitis B vaccination of DHCP, 4 implementa

Chunk 373:
brospinal fluid, feces, nasopharyngeal washings, saliva, semen, tion of the 1991 OSHA bloodborne pathogen standard 68,

Chunk 374:
sweat, and synovial fluid. However, the majority of body flu and 5 incomplete ascertainment and reporting. Only one case

Chunk 375:
ids are not efficient vehicles for transmission because they con of patienttopatient transmission of HBV in the dental set

Chunk 376:
tain low quantities of infectious HBV, despite the presence of ting has been documented CDC, unpublished data, 2003.

Chunk 377:
HBsAg 19. The concentration of HBsAg in body fluids can In this case, appropriate office infectioncontrol procedures

Chunk 378:
be 1001,000fold greater than the concentration of infec were being followed, and the exact mechanism of transmis
tious HBV particles 39. sion was undetermined.

Chunk 379:
Although percutaneous injuries are among the most effi Because of the high risk of HBV infection among HCP,

Chunk 380:
cient modes of HBV transmission, these exposures probably DHCP who perform tasks that might involve contact with

Chunk 381:
account for only a minority of HBV infections among HCP. blood, bloodcontaminated body substances, other body flu

Chunk 382:
In multiple investigations of nosocomial hepatitis B outbreaks, ids, or sharps should be vaccinated 2,13,17,19,69. Vaccina

Chunk 383:
the majority of infected HCP could not recall an overt percu tion can protect both DHCP and patients from HBV infection

Chunk 384:
taneous injury 40,41, although in certain studies, approxi and, whenever possible, should be completed when dentists

Chunk 385:
mately one third of infected HCP recalled caring for a patient or other DHCP are in training and before they have contact
who was HBsAgpositive 42,43. In addition, HBV has been with blood.

Chunk 386:
demonstrated to survive in dried blood at room temperature Prevaccination serological testing for previous infection is

Chunk 387:
on environmental surfaces for 1 week 44. Thus, HBV not indicated, although it can be costeffective where preva

Chunk 388:
infections that occur in HCP with no history of nonoccupa lence of infection is expected to be high in a group of potential

Chunk 389:
tional exposure or occupational percutaneous injury might have vacinees e.g., persons who have emigrated from areas with

Chunk 390:
resulted from direct or indirect blood or body fluid exposures high rates of HBV infection. DHCP should be tested for anti

Chunk 391:
that inoculated HBV into cutaneous scratches, abrasions, HBs 12 months after completion of the 3dose vaccination

Chunk 392:
burns, other lesions, or on mucosal surfaces 4547. The series 17. DHCP who do not develop an adequate antibody

Chunk 393:
potential for HBV transmission through contact with envi response i.e., antiHBs 10 mIUmL to the primary vaccine

Chunk 394:
ronmental surfaces has been demonstrated in investigations of series should complete a second 3dose vaccine series or be

Chunk 395:
HBV outbreaks among patients and HCP in hemodialysis units evaluated to determine if they are HBsAgpositive 17.
4850. Revaccinated persons should be retested for antiHBs at the

Chunk 396:
Since the early 1980s, occupational infections among HCP completion of the second vaccine series. Approximately half

Chunk 397:
have declined because of vaccine use and adherence to univer of nonresponders to the primary series will respond to a sec

Chunk 398:
sal precautions 51. Among U.S. dentists, 90 have been ond 3dose series. If no antibody response occurs after the

Chunk 399:
vaccinated, and serologic evidence of past HBV infection second series, testing for HBsAg should be performed 17.

Chunk 400:
decreased from prevaccine levels of 14 in 1972 to approxi Persons who prove to be HBsAgpositive should be counseled

Chunk 401:
mately 9 in 1992 52. During 19932001, levels remained regarding how to prevent HBV transmission to others and

Chunk 402:
relatively unchanged Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Den regarding the need for medical evaluation. Nonresponders to

Chunk 403:
tal Association, Chicago, Illinois, personal communication, vaccination who are HBsAgnegative should be considered

Chunk 404:
June 2003. Infection rates can be expected to decline further susceptible to HBV infection and should be counseled regard

Chunk 405:
as vaccination rates remain high among young dentists and as ing precautions to prevent HBV infection and the need to

Chunk 406:
older dentists with lower vaccination rates and higher rates of obtain HBIG prophylaxis for any known or probable parenteral
infection retire. exposure to HBsAgpositive blood.

Chunk 407:
Although the potential for transmission of bloodborne Vaccineinduced antibodies decline gradually over time, and

Chunk 408:
infections from DHCP to patients is considered limited 60 of persons who initially respond to vaccination will lose

Chunk 409:
5355, precise risks have not been quantified by carefully detectable antibodies over 12 years. Even so, immunity con

Chunk 410:
designed epidemiologic studies 53,56,57. Reports published tinues to prevent clinical disease or detectable viral infection

Chunk 411:
during 19701987 describe nine clusters in which patients 17. Booster doses of vaccine and periodic serologic testing to

Chunk 412:
were thought to be infected with HBV through treatment by monitor antibody concentrations after completion of the vac

Chunk 413:
an infected DHCP 5867. However, transmission of HBV cine series are not necessary for vaccine responders 17.
12 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 414:
Hepatitis D Virus HCP, including 33 dentists or dental students 55,93. No
additional cases of transmission were documented.
An estimated 4 of persons with acute HBV infection are

Chunk 415:
Prospective studies worldwide indicate the average risk of
also infected with hepatitis Delta virus HDV. Discovered in
HIV infection after a single percutaneous exposure to

Chunk 416:
1977, HDV is a defective bloodborne virus requiring the pres
HIVinfected blood is 0.3 range 0.20.5 94. After
ence of HBV to replicate. Patients coinfected with HBV and

Chunk 417:
an exposure of mucous membranes in the eye, nose, or mouth,
HDV have substantially higher mortality rates than those
the risk is approximately 0.1 76. The precise risk of trans

Chunk 418:
infected with HBV alone. Because HDV infection is depen
mission after skin exposure remains unknown but is believed
dent on HBV for replication, immunization to prevent HBV

Chunk 419:
to be even smaller than that for mucous membrane exposure.
infection, through either pre or postexposure prophylaxis, can
Certain factors affect the risk of HIV transmission after an

Chunk 420:
also prevent HDV infection 70.
occupational exposure. Laboratory studies have determined if
Hepatitis C Virus needles that pass through latex gloves are solid rather than

Chunk 421:
Hepatitis C virus appears not to be transmitted efficiently hollowbore, or are of small gauge e.g., anesthetic needles

Chunk 422:
through occupational exposures to blood. Followup studies commonly used in dentistry, they transfer less blood 36. In

Chunk 423:
of HCP exposed to HCVinfected blood through percutane a retrospective casecontrol study of HCP, an increased risk

Chunk 424:
ous or other sharps injuries have determined a low incidence for HIV infection was associated with exposure to a relatively

Chunk 425:
of seroconversion mean 1.8 range, 07 7174. One large volume of blood, as indicated by a deep injury with a

Chunk 426:
study determined transmission occurred from hollowbore device that was visibly contaminated with the patients blood,

Chunk 427:
needles but not other sharps 72. Although these studies have or a procedure that involved a needle placed in a vein or artery

Chunk 428:
not documented seroconversion associated with mucous mem 95. The risk was also increased if the exposure was to blood

Chunk 429:
brane or nonintact skin exposure, at least two cases of HCV from patients with terminal illnesses, possibly reflecting the

Chunk 430:
transmission from a blood splash to the conjunctiva 75,76 higher titer of HIV in latestage AIDS.
and one case of simultaneous transmission of HCV and HIV
Exposure Prevention Methods

Chunk 431:
after nonintact skin exposure have been reported 77.
Avoiding occupational exposures to blood is the primary
Data are insufficient to estimate the occupational risk of

Chunk 432:
way to prevent transmission of HBV, HCV, and HIV, to HCP
HCV infection among HCP, but the majority of studies indi
in healthcare settings 19,96,97. Exposures occur through

Chunk 433:
cate the prevalence of HCV infection among dentists, sur
percutaneous injury e.g., a needlestick or cut with a sharp
geons, and hospitalbased HCP is similar to that among the

Chunk 434:
object, as well as through contact between potentially infec
general population, approximately 12 7886. In a study
tious blood, tissues, or other body fluids and mucous mem

Chunk 435:
that evaluated risk factors for infection, a history of uninten
branes of the eye, nose, mouth, or nonintact skin e.g., exposed
tional needlesticks was the only occupational risk factor inde

Chunk 436:
skin that is chapped, abraded, or shows signs of dermatitis.
pendently associated with HCV infection 80.
Observational studies and surveys indicate that percutane

Chunk 437:
No studies of transmission from HCVinfected DHCP to
ous injuries among general dentists and oral surgeons occur
patients have been reported, and the risk for such transmis

Chunk 438:
less frequently than among general and orthopedic surgeons
sion appears limited. Multiple reports have been published
and have decreased in frequency since the mid1980s 98102.

Chunk 439:
describing transmission from HCVinfected surgeons, which
This decline has been attributed to safer work practices, safer
apparently occurred during performance of invasive procedures

Chunk 440:
instrumentation or design, and continued DHCP education
the overall risk for infection averaged 0.17 8790.
103,104. Percutaneous injuries among DHCP usually

Chunk 441:
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1 occur outside the patients mouth, thereby posing less risk

Chunk 442:
In the United States, the risk of HIV transmission in dental for recontact with patient tissues 2 involve limited amounts

Chunk 443:
settings is extremely low. As of December 2001, a total of 57 of blood and 3 are caused by burs, syringe needles, labora

Chunk 444:
cases of HIV seroconversion had been documented among tory knives, and other sharp instruments 99102,105,106.

Chunk 445:
HCP, but none among DHCP, after occupational exposure to Injuries among oral surgeons might occur more frequently

Chunk 446:
a known HIVinfected source 91. Transmission of HIV to during fracture reductions using wires 104,107. Experience,

Chunk 447:
six patients of a single dentist with AIDS has been reported, as measured by years in practice, does not appear to affect the

Chunk 448:
but the mode of transmission could not be determined risk of injury among general dentists or oral surgeons
2,92,93. As of September 30, 1993, CDC had information 100,104,107.

Chunk 449:
regarding test results of 22,000 patients of 63 HIVinfected
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 13

Chunk 450:
The majority of exposures in dentistry are preventable, and Workpractice controls for needles and other sharps include

Chunk 451:
methods to reduce the risk of blood contacts have included placing used disposable syringes and needles, scalpel blades,

Chunk 452:
use of standard precautions, use of devices with features engi and other sharp items in appropriate punctureresistant con

Chunk 453:
neered to prevent sharp injuries, and modifications of work tainers located as close as feasible to where the items were used

Chunk 454:
practices. These approaches might have contributed to the 2,7,13,113115. In addition, used needles should never be

Chunk 455:
decrease in percutaneous injuries among dentists during recapped or otherwise manipulated by using both hands, or

Chunk 456:
recent years 98100,103. However, needlesticks and other any other technique that involves directing the point of a needle

Chunk 457:
blood contacts continue to occur, which is a concern because toward any part of the body 2,7,13,97,113,114. A one

Chunk 458:
percutaneous injuries pose the greatest risk of transmission. handed scoop technique, a mechanical device designed for

Chunk 459:
Standard precautions include use of PPE e.g., gloves, masks, holding the needle cap to facilitate onehanded recapping, or

Chunk 460:
protective eyewear or face shield, and gowns intended to pre an engineered sharps injury protection device e.g., needles

Chunk 461:
vent skin and mucous membrane exposures. Other protective with resheathing mechanisms should be employed for recap

Chunk 462:
equipment e.g., finger guards while suturing might also ping needles between uses and before disposal

Chunk 463:
reduce injuries during dental procedures 104. 2,7,13,113,114. DHCP should never bend or break needles

Chunk 464:
Engineering controls are the primary method to reduce before disposal because this practice requires unnecessary

Chunk 465:
exposures to blood and OPIM from sharp instruments and manipulation. Before attempting to remove needles from

Chunk 466:
needles. These controls are frequently technologybased and nondisposable aspirating syringes, DHCP should recap them

Chunk 467:
often incorporate safer designs of instruments and devices e.g., to prevent injuries. For procedures involving multiple injec

Chunk 468:
selfsheathing anesthetic needles and dental units designed to tions with a single needle, the practitioner should recap the

Chunk 469:
shield burs in handpieces to reduce percutaneous injuries needle between injections by using a onehanded technique or
101,103,108. use a device with a needleresheathing mechanism. Passing a

Chunk 470:
Workpractice controls establish practices to protect DHCP syringe with an unsheathed needle should be avoided because

Chunk 471:
whose responsibilities include handling, using, assembling, or of the potential for injury.

Chunk 472:
processing sharp devices e.g., needles, scalers, laboratory util Additional information for developing a safety program and

Chunk 473:
ity knives, burs, explorers, and endodontic files or sharps dis for identifying and evaluating safer dental devices is available at

Chunk 474:
posal containers. Workpractice controls can include removing cid127 httpwww.cdc.govOralHealthinfectioncontrol

Chunk 475:
burs before disassembling the handpiece from the dental unit, forms.htm forms for screening and evaluating safer den
restricting use of fingers in tissue retraction or palpation dur tal devices, and

Chunk 476:
ing suturing and administration of anesthesia, and minimiz cid127 httpwww.cdc.govnioshtopicsbbp state legislation on
ing potentially uncontrolled movements of such instruments needlestick safety.

Chunk 477:
as scalers or laboratory knives 101,105.
Postexposure Management and Prophylaxis
As indicated, needles are a substantial source of percutane

Chunk 478:
ous injury in dental practice, and engineering and work Postexposure management is an integral component of a

Chunk 479:
practice controls for needle handling are of particular complete program to prevent infection after an occupational

Chunk 480:
importance. In 2001, revisions to OSHAs bloodborne patho exposure to blood. During dental procedures, saliva is pre

Chunk 481:
gens standard as mandated by the Needlestick Safety and Pre dictably contaminated with blood 7,114. Even when blood

Chunk 482:
vention Act of 2000 became effective. These revisions clarify is not visible, it can still be present in limited quantities and

Chunk 483:
the need for employers to consider safer needle devices as they therefore is considered a potentially infectious material by

Chunk 484:
become available and to involve employees directly respon OSHA 13,19. A qualified healthcare professional should

Chunk 485:
sible for patient care e.g., dentists, hygienists, and dental evaluate any occupational exposure incident to blood or OPIM,

Chunk 486:
assistants in identifying and choosing such devices 109. Safer including saliva, regardless of whether blood is visible, in den

Chunk 487:
versions of sharp devices used in hospital settings have become tal settings 13.

Chunk 488:
available e.g., blunt suture needles, phlebotomy devices, and Dental practices and laboratories should establish written,

Chunk 489:
butterfly needles, and their impact on reducing injuries has comprehensive programs that include hepatitis B vaccination

Chunk 490:
been documented 110112. Aspirating anesthetic syringes and postexposure management protocols that 1 describe the

Chunk 491:
that incorporate safety features have been developed for den types of contact with blood or OPIM that can place DHCP at

Chunk 492:
tal procedures, but the low injury rates in dentistry limit risk for infection 2 describe procedures for promptly report

Chunk 493:
assessment of their effect on reducing injuries among DHCP. ing and evaluating such exposures and 3 identify a health
14 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 494:
care professional who is qualified to provide counseling and the source was infected with HIV, the stage of disease,

Chunk 495:
perform all medical evaluations and procedures in accordance history of antiretroviral therapy, and viral load, if known.

Chunk 496:
with current recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Ser cid127 Details regarding the exposed person e.g., hepatitis B vac

Chunk 497:
vice PHS, including PEP with chemotherapeutic drugs when cination and vaccineresponse status.

Chunk 498:
indicated. DHCP, including students, who might reasonably cid127 Details regarding counseling, postexposure management,
be considered at risk for occupational exposure to blood or and followup.

Chunk 499:
OPIM should be taught strategies to prevent contact with blood Each occupational exposure should be evaluated individually

Chunk 500:
or OPIM and the principles of postexposure management, for its potential to transmit HBV, HCV, and HIV, based on
including PEP options, as part of their job orientation and the following

Chunk 501:
training. Educational programs for DHCP and students should cid127 The type and amount of body substance involved.

Chunk 502:
emphasize reporting all exposures to blood or OPIM as soon cid127 The type of exposure e.g., percutaneous injury, mucous

Chunk 503:
as possible, because certain interventions have to be initiated membrane or nonintact skin exposure, or bites resulting

Chunk 504:
promptly to be effective. Policies should be consistent with in blood exposure to either person involved.

Chunk 505:
the practices and procedures for worker protection required cid127 The infection status of the source.

Chunk 506:
by OSHA and with current PHS recommendations for man cid127 The susceptibility of the exposed person 19.

Chunk 507:
aging occupational exposures to blood 13,19. All of these factors should be considered in assessing the risk

Chunk 508:
After an occupational blood exposure, first aid should be for infection and the need for further followup e.g., PEP.

Chunk 509:
administered as necessary. Puncture wounds and other inju During 19901998, PHS published guidelines for PEP and

Chunk 510:
ries to the skin should be washed with soap and water other management of healthcare worker exposures to HBV,

Chunk 511:
mucous membranes should be flushed with water. No evidence HCV, or HIV 69,116119. In 2001, these recommenda

Chunk 512:
exists that using antiseptics for wound care or expressing fluid tions were updated and consolidated into one set of PHS guide

Chunk 513:
by squeezing the wound further reduces the risk of bloodborne lines 19. The new guidelines reflect the availability of new

Chunk 514:
pathogen transmission however, use of antiseptics is not con antiretroviral agents, new information regarding the use and

Chunk 515:
traindicated. The application of caustic agents e.g., bleach safety of HIV PEP, and considerations regarding employing

Chunk 516:
or the injection of antiseptics or disinfectants into the wound HIV PEP when resistance of the source patients virus to

Chunk 517:
is not recommended 19. Exposed DHCP should immedi antiretroviral agents is known or suspected. In addition, the

Chunk 518:
ately report the exposure to the infectioncontrol coordinator 2001 guidelines provide guidance to clinicians and exposed

Chunk 519:
or other designated person, who should initiate referral to the HCP regarding when to consider HIV PEP and recommen

Chunk 520:
qualified healthcare professional and complete necessary dations for PEP regimens 19.
reports. Because multiple factors contribute to the risk of

Chunk 521:
infection after an occupational exposure to blood, the follow Hand Hygiene
ing information should be included in the exposure report,
Hand hygiene e.g., handwashing, hand antisepsis, or surgi

Chunk 522:
recorded in the exposed persons confidential medical record,
cal hand antisepsis substantially reduces potential pathogens
and provided to the qualified healthcare professional

Chunk 523:
on the hands and is considered the single most critical mea
cid127 Date and time of exposure.
sure for reducing the risk of transmitting organisms to

Chunk 524:
cid127 Details of the procedure being performed, including where
patients and HCP 120123. Hospitalbased studies have
and how the exposure occurred and whether the exposure

Chunk 525:
demonstrated that noncompliance with hand hygiene prac
involved a sharp device, the type and brand of device, and
tices is associated with healthcareassociated infections and

Chunk 526:
how and when during its handling the exposure occurred.
the spread of multiresistant organisms. Noncompliance also
cid127 Details of the exposure, including its severity and the type

Chunk 527:
has been a major contributor to outbreaks 123. The preva
and amount of fluid or material. For a percutaneous injury,
lence of healthcareassociated infections decreases as adher

Chunk 528:
severity might be measured by the depth of the wound,
ence of HCP to recommended hand hygiene measures
gauge of the needle, and whether fluid was injected for a
improves 124126.

Chunk 529:
improves 124126.
skin or mucous membrane exposure, the estimated vol
The microbial flora of the skin, first described in 1938, con
ume of material, duration of contact, and the condition

Chunk 530:
sist of transient and resident microorganisms 127. Transient
of the skin e.g., chapped, abraded, or intact should be
flora, which colonize the superficial layers of the skin, are easier
noted.

Chunk 531:
noted.
to remove by routine handwashing. They are often acquired
cid127 Details regarding whether the source material was known
by HCP during direct contact with patients or contaminated

Chunk 532:
to contain HIV or other bloodborne pathogens, and, if
environmental surfaces these organisms are most frequently
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 15

Chunk 533:
associated with healthcareassociated infections. Resident flora applied is critical because microorganisms can colonize on

Chunk 534:
attached to deeper layers of the skin are more resistant to hands in the moist environment underneath gloves 122.

Chunk 535:
removal and less likely to be associated with such infections. Alcohol hand rubs are rapidly germicidal when applied to

Chunk 536:
The preferred method for hand hygiene depends on the type the skin but should include such antiseptics as chlorhexidine,

Chunk 537:
of procedure, the degree of contamination, and the desired quaternary ammonium compounds, octenidine, or triclosan

Chunk 538:
persistence of antimicrobial action on the skin Table 2. For to achieve persistent activity 130. Factors that can influence

Chunk 539:
routine dental examinations and nonsurgical procedures, the effectiveness of the surgical hand antisepsis in addition to

Chunk 540:
handwashing and hand antisepsis is achieved by using either a the choice of antiseptic agent include duration and technique

Chunk 541:
plain or antimicrobial soap and water. If the hands are not of scrubbing, as well as condition of the hands, and techniques

Chunk 542:
visibly soiled, an alcoholbased hand rub is adequate. used for drying and gloving. CDCs 2002 guideline on hand

Chunk 543:
The purpose of surgical hand antisepsis is to eliminate tran hygiene in healthcare settings provides more complete infor
sient flora and reduce resident flora for the duration of a pro mation 123.

Chunk 544:
cedure to prevent introduction of organisms in the operative
Selection of Antiseptic Agents
wound, if gloves become punctured or torn. Skin bacteria can

Chunk 545:
rapidly multiply under surgical gloves if hands are washed with Selecting the most appropriate antiseptic agent for hand

Chunk 546:
soap that is not antimicrobial 127,128. Thus, an antimicro hygiene requires consideration of multiple factors. Essential

Chunk 547:
bial soap or alcohol hand rub with persistent activity should performance characteristics of a product e.g., the spectrum

Chunk 548:
be used before surgical procedures 129131. and persistence of activity and whether or not the agent is fast

Chunk 549:
Agents used for surgical hand antisepsis should substantially acting should be determined before selecting a product.

Chunk 550:
reduce microorganisms on intact skin, contain a nonirritating Delivery system, cost per use, reliable vendor support and sup

Chunk 551:
antimicrobial preparation, have a broad spectrum of activity, ply are also considerations. Because HCP acceptance is a

Chunk 552:
be fastacting, and have a persistent effect 121,132135. major factor regarding compliance with recommended hand

Chunk 553:
Persistence i.e., extended antimicrobial activity that prevents hygiene protocols 122,123,147,148, considering DHCP

Chunk 554:
or inhibits survival of microorganisms after the product is needs is critical and should include possible chemical allergies,
TABLE 2. Handhygiene methods and indications

Chunk 555:
Method Agent Purpose Duration minimum Indication
Routine handwash Water and nonantimicrobial soap e.g., Remove soil and transient 15 seconds Before and after treating each patient

Chunk 556:
plain soap microorganisms e.g., before glove placement and after
glove removal. After barehanded

Chunk 557:
Antiseptic handwash Water and antimicrobial soap e.g., Remove or destroy 15 seconds touching of inanimate objects likely to be

Chunk 558:
chlorhexidine, iodine and iodophors, transient microorganisms contaminated by blood or saliva. Before

Chunk 559:
chloroxylenol PCMX, triclosan and reduce resident flora leaving the dental operatory or the dental
laboratory. When visibly soiled. Before

Chunk 560:
Antiseptic hand rub Alcoholbased hand rub Remove or destroy Rub hands until the regloving after removing gloves that are
transient microorganisms agent is dry torn, cut, or punctured.

Chunk 561:
and reduce resident flora
Surgical antisepsis Water and antimicrobial soap e.g., Remove or destroy 26 minutes Before donning sterile surgeons gloves

Chunk 562:
chlorhexidine, iodine and iodophors, transient microorganisms for surgical procedures
chloroxylenol PCMX, triclosan and reduce resident flora Follow manufacturer
persistent effect instructions for

Chunk 563:
Water and nonantimicrobial soap e.g., surgical handscrub
plain soap followed by an alcoholbased product with
surgical handscrub product with persistent activity
persistent activity

Chunk 564:
persistent activity
 7,9,11,13,113,120123,125,126,136138.

Chunk 565:
Pathogenic organisms have been found on or around bar soap during and after use 139. Use of liquid soap with handsfree dispensing controls is preferable.

Chunk 566:
Time reported as effective in removing most transient flora from the skin. For most procedures, a vigorous rubbing together of all surfaces of premoistened lathered hands and

Chunk 567:
fingers for 15 seconds, followed by rinsing under a stream of cool or tepid water is recommended 9,120,123,140,141. Hands should always be dried thoroughly before
donning gloves.

Chunk 568:
donning gloves.
 Alcoholbased hand rubs should contain 6095 ethanol or isopropanol and should not be used in the presence of visible soil or organic material. If using an alcoholbased

Chunk 569:
hand rub, apply adequate amount to palm of one hand and rub hands together, covering all surfaces of the hands and fingers, until hands are dry. Follow manufacturers

Chunk 570:
recommendations regarding the volume of product to use. If hands feel dry after rubbing them together for 1015 seconds, an insufficient volume of product likely was applied.

Chunk 571:
The drying effect of alcohol can be reduced or eliminated by adding 13 glycerol or other skinconditioning agents 123.

Chunk 572:
After application of alcoholbased surgical handscrub product with persistent activity as recommended, allow hands and forearms to dry thoroughly and immediately don sterile

Chunk 573:
surgeons gloves 144,145. Follow manufacturer instructions 122,123,137,146.

Chunk 574:
Before beginning surgical hand scrub, remove all arm jewelry and any hand jewelry that may make donning gloves more difficult, cause gloves to tear more readily 142,143,

Chunk 575:
or interfere with glove usage e.g., ability to wear the correctsized glove or altered glove integrity.
16 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 576:
skin integrity after repeated use, compatibility with lotions used, wearers of artificial nails than among nonwearers, both before

Chunk 577:
and offensive agent ingredients e.g., scent. Discussing spe and after handwashing 157160. In addition, artificial fin

Chunk 578:
cific preparations or ingredients used for hand antisepsis is gernails or extenders have been epidemiologically implicated

Chunk 579:
beyond the scope of this report. DHCP should choose from in multiple outbreaks involving fungal and bacterial infections

Chunk 580:
commercially available HCP handwashes when selecting agents in hospital intensivecare units and operating rooms 161

Chunk 581:
for hand antisepsis or surgical hand antisepsis. 164. Freshly applied nail polish on natural nails does not
increase the microbial load from periungual skin if fingernails

Chunk 582:
Storage and Dispensing of Hand Care
are short however, chipped nail polish can harbor added bac
Products
teria 165,166.
Handwashing products, including plain i.e., non
Jewelry

Chunk 583:
Jewelry
antimicrobial soap and antiseptic products, can become con
taminated or support the growth of microorganisms 122. Studies have demonstrated that skin underneath rings is more

Chunk 584:
Liquid products should be stored in closed containers and dis heavily colonized than comparable areas of skin on fingers

Chunk 585:
pensed from either disposable containers or containers that without rings 167170. In a study of intensivecare nurses,

Chunk 586:
are washed and dried thoroughly before refilling. Soap should multivariable analysis determined rings were the only substan

Chunk 587:
not be added to a partially empty dispenser, because this prac tial risk factor for carriage of gramnegative bacilli and Staphy

Chunk 588:
tice of topping off might lead to bacterial contamination lococcus aureus, and the concentration of organisms correlated

Chunk 589:
149,150. Store and dispense products according to manu with the number of rings worn 170. However, two other
facturers directions. studies demonstrated that mean bacterial colony counts on

Chunk 590:
hands after handwashing were similar among persons wearing
Lotions
rings and those not wearing rings 169,171. Whether wear

Chunk 591:
The primary defense against infection and transmission of ing rings increases the likelihood of transmitting a pathogen is

Chunk 592:
pathogens is healthy, unbroken skin. Frequent handwashing unknown further studies are needed to establish whether rings

Chunk 593:
with soaps and antiseptic agents can cause chronic irritant con result in higher transmission of pathogens in healthcare set

Chunk 594:
tact dermatitis among DHCP. Damage to the skin changes tings. However, rings and decorative nail jewelry can make

Chunk 595:
skin flora, resulting in more frequent colonization by staphy donning gloves more difficult and cause gloves to tear more

Chunk 596:
lococci and gramnegative bacteria 151,152. The potential readily 142,143. Thus, jewelry should not interfere with glove

Chunk 597:
of detergents to cause skin irritation varies considerably, but use e.g., impair ability to wear the correctsized glove or alter

Chunk 598:
can be reduced by adding emollients. Lotions are often rec glove integrity.
ommended to ease the dryness resulting from frequent
handwashing and to prevent dermatitis from glove use

Chunk 599:
Personal Protective Equipment
153,154. However, petroleumbased lotion formulations can
PPE is designed to protect the skin and the mucous mem

Chunk 600:
weaken latex gloves and increase permeability. For that reason,
branes of the eyes, nose, and mouth of DHCP from exposure
lotions that contain petroleum or other oil emollients should

Chunk 601:
to blood or OPIM. Use of rotary dental and surgical instru
only be used at the end of the work day 122,155. Dental
ments e.g., handpieces or ultrasonic scalers and airwater

Chunk 602:
practitioners should obtain information from lotion manu
syringes creates a visible spray that contains primarily large
facturers regarding interaction between lotions, gloves, dental

Chunk 603:
particle droplets of water, saliva, blood, microorganisms, and
materials, and antimicrobial products.
other debris. This spatter travels only a short distance and settles

Chunk 604:
Fingernails and Artificial Nails out quickly, landing on the floor, nearby operatory surfaces,

Chunk 605:
Although the relationship between fingernail length and DHCP, or the patient. The spray also might contain certain

Chunk 606:
wound infection is unknown, keeping nails short is consid aerosols i.e., particles of respirable size, 10 µm. Aerosols can

Chunk 607:
ered key because the majority of flora on the hands are found remain airborne for extended periods and can be inhaled. How

Chunk 608:
under and around the fingernails 156. Fingernails should be ever, they should not be confused with the largeparticle spat

Chunk 609:
short enough to allow DHCP to thoroughly clean underneath ter that makes up the bulk of the spray from handpieces and

Chunk 610:
them and prevent glove tears 122. Sharp nail edges or bro ultrasonic scalers. Appropriate work practices, including use of

Chunk 611:
ken nails are also likely to increase glove failure. Long artificial dental dams 172 and highvelocity air evacuation, should

Chunk 612:
or natural nails can make donning gloves more difficult and minimize dissemination of droplets, spatter, and aerosols 2.

Chunk 613:
can cause gloves to tear more readily. Hand carriage of gram Primary PPE used in oral healthcare settings includes gloves,

Chunk 614:
negative organisms has been determined to be greater among surgical masks, protective eyewear, face shields, and protective
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 17

Chunk 615:
clothing e.g., gowns and jackets. All PPE should be removed material for incoming air and how well the face piece fits or

Chunk 616:
before DHCP leave patientcare areas 13. Reusable PPE e.g., seals to the face e.g., qualitatively or quantitatively tested in a

Chunk 617:
clinician or patient protective eyewear and face shields should reliable way to obtain a faceseal leakage of 10 and to fit

Chunk 618:
be cleaned with soap and water, and when visibly soiled, dis the different facial sizes and characteristics of HCP.

Chunk 619:
infected between patients, according to the manufacturers When respirators are used while treating patients with dis

Chunk 620:
directions 2,13. Wearing gloves, surgical masks, protective eases requiring airbornetransmission precautions e.g., TB,

Chunk 621:
eyewear, and protective clothing in specified circumstances to they should be used in the context of a complete respiratory

Chunk 622:
reduce the risk of exposures to bloodborne pathogens is man protection program 175. This program should include train

Chunk 623:
dated by OSHA 13. General work clothes e.g., uniforms, ing and fit testing to ensure an adequate seal between the edges

Chunk 624:
scrubs, pants, and shirts are neither intended to protect against of the respirator and the wearers face. Detailed information

Chunk 625:
a hazard nor considered PPE. regarding respirator programs, including fittest procedures are
available at httpwww.cdc.govniosh99143.html 174,176.
Masks, Protective Eyewear, Face Shields

Chunk 626:
Protective Clothing
A surgical mask that covers both the nose and mouth and

Chunk 627:
protective eyewear with solid side shields or a face shield should Protective clothing and equipment e.g., gowns, lab coats,

Chunk 628:
be worn by DHCP during procedures and patientcare activi gloves, masks, and protective eyewear or face shield should be

Chunk 629:
ties likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood or body flu worn to prevent contamination of street clothing and to pro

Chunk 630:
ids. Protective eyewear for patients shields their eyes from tect the skin of DHCP from exposures to blood and body

Chunk 631:
spatter or debris generated during dental procedures. A surgi substances 2,7,10,11,13,137. OSHA bloodborne pathogens

Chunk 632:
cal mask protects against microorganisms generated by the standard requires sleeves to be long enough to protect the fore

Chunk 633:
wearer, with 95 bacterial filtration efficiency, and also pro arms when the gown is worn as PPE i.e., when spatter and

Chunk 634:
tects DHCP from largeparticle droplet spatter that might spray of blood, saliva, or OPIM to the forearms is anticipated

Chunk 635:
contain bloodborne pathogens or other infectious microor 13,14. DHCP should change protective clothing when it

Chunk 636:
ganisms 173. The masks outer surface can become contami becomes visibly soiled and as soon as feasible if penetrated by

Chunk 637:
nated with infectious droplets from spray of oral fluids or from blood or other potentially infectious fluids 2,13,14,137. All

Chunk 638:
touching the mask with contaminated fingers. Also, when a protective clothing should be removed before leaving the work
mask becomes wet from exhaled moist air, the resistance to area 13.

Chunk 639:
airflow through the mask increases, causing more airflow to
Gloves and Gloving
pass around edges of the mask. If the mask becomes wet, it

Chunk 640:
should be changed between patients or even during patient DHCP wear gloves to prevent contamination of their hands

Chunk 641:
treatment, when possible 2,174. when touching mucous membranes, blood, saliva, or OPIM,

Chunk 642:
When airborne infection isolation precautions expanded and also to reduce the likelihood that microorganisms present

Chunk 643:
or transmissionbased are necessary e.g., for TB patients, a on the hands of DHCP will be transmitted to patients during

Chunk 644:
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health surgical or other patientcare procedures 1,2,7,10. Medical

Chunk 645:
NIOSHcertified particulatefilter respirator e.g., N95, N99, gloves, both patient examination and surgeons gloves, are

Chunk 646:
or N100 should be used 20. N95 refers to the ability to manufactured as singleuse disposable items that should be

Chunk 647:
filter 1µm particles in the unloaded state with a filter effi used for only one patient, then discarded. Gloves should be

Chunk 648:
ciency of 95 i.e., filter leakage 5, given flow rates of changed between patients and when torn or punctured.

Chunk 649:
50 Lmin i.e., approximate maximum airflow rate of HCP Wearing gloves does not eliminate the need for handwashing.

Chunk 650:
during breathing. Available data indicate infectious droplet Hand hygiene should be performed immediately before don

Chunk 651:
nuclei measure 15 µm therefore, respirators used in health ning gloves. Gloves can have small, unapparent defects or can

Chunk 652:
care settings should be able to efficiently filter the smallest be torn during use, and hands can become contaminated dur

Chunk 653:
particles in this range. ing glove removal 122,177187. These circumstances increase
The majority of surgical masks are not NIOSHcertified as the risk of operative wound contamination and exposure of

Chunk 654:
respirators, do not protect the user adequately from exposure the DHCPs hands to microorganisms from patients. In addi

Chunk 655:
to TB, and do not satisfy OSHA requirements for respiratory tion, bacteria can multiply rapidly in the moist environments

Chunk 656:
protection 174,175. However, certain surgical masks i.e., underneath gloves, and thus, the hands should be dried thor

Chunk 657:
surgical N95 respirator do meet the requirements and are cer oughly before donning gloves and washed again immediately

Chunk 658:
tified by NIOSH as respirators. The level of protection a res after glove removal.
pirator provides is determined by the efficiency of the filter
18 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 659:
Types of Gloves developed defects in 30 minutes3 hours, depending on type
of glove and procedure. Investigators did not determine an
Because gloves are taskspecific, their selection should be

Chunk 660:
optimal time for changing gloves during procedures.
based on the type of procedure to be performed e.g., surgery
During dental procedures, patient examination and surgeons

Chunk 661:
or patient examination Table 3. Sterile surgeons gloves must
gloves commonly contact multiple types of chemicals and
meet standards for sterility assurance established by FDA and

Chunk 662:
materials e.g., disinfectants and antiseptics, composite resins,
are less likely than patient examination gloves to harbor patho
and bonding agents that can compromise the integrity of

Chunk 663:
gens that could contaminate an operative wound 188.
latex as well as vinyl, nitrile, and other synthetic glove materi
Appropriate gloves in the correct size should be readily acces

Chunk 664:
als 198206. In addition, latex gloves can interfere with the
sible 13.
setting of vinyl polysiloxane impression materials 207209,

Chunk 665:
Glove Integrity although the setting is apparently not adversely affected by
Limited studies of the penetrability of different glove mate synthetic vinyl gloves 207,208. Given the diverse selection

Chunk 666:
rials under conditions of use have been conducted in the den of dental materials on the market, dental practitioners should

Chunk 667:
tal environment. Consistent with observations in clinical consult glove manufacturers regarding the chemical compat

Chunk 668:
medicine, leakage rates vary by glove material e.g., latex, vinyl, ibility of glove materials.

Chunk 669:
and nitrile, duration of use, and type of procedure performed If the integrity of a glove is compromised e.g., punctured,

Chunk 670:
182,184,186,189191, as well as by manufacturer 192 it should be changed as soon as possible 13,210,211. Wash

Chunk 671:
194. The frequency of perforations in surgeons gloves used ing latex gloves with plain soap, chlorhexidine, or alcohol can

Chunk 672:
during outpatient oral surgical procedures has been determined lead to the formation of glove micropunctures 177,212,213

Chunk 673:
to range from 6 to 16 181,185,195,196. and subsequent hand contamination 138. Because this con

Chunk 674:
Studies have demonstrated that HCP and DHCP are fre dition, known as wicking, can allow penetration of liquids

Chunk 675:
quently unaware of minute tears in gloves that occur during through undetected holes, washing gloves is not recommended.

Chunk 676:
use 186,190,191,197. These studies determined that gloves After a hand rub with alcohol, the hands should be thoroughly
TABLE 3. Glove types and indications
Commercially available glove materials

Chunk 677:
Glove Indication Comment Material Attributes
Patient Patient care, examinations, Medical device regulated by the Food and Drug Naturalrubber latex NRL 1, 2

Chunk 678:
examination other nonsurgical proce Administration FDA. Nitrile 2, 3
gloves dures involving contact with Nitrile and chloroprene neoprene blends 2, 3

Chunk 679:
mucous membranes, and Nonsterile and sterile singleuse disposable. Use Nitrile NRL blends 1, 2, 3
laboratory procedures for one patient and discard appropriately. Butadiene methyl methacrylate 2, 3

Chunk 680:
Polyvinyl chloride PVC, vinyl 4
Polyurethane 4
Styrenebased copolymer 4, 5
Surgeons Surgical procedures Medical device regulated by the FDA. NRL 1, 2
gloves Nitrile 2, 3

Chunk 681:
gloves Nitrile 2, 3
Sterile and singleuse disposable. Use for one Chloroprene neoprene 2, 3
patient and discard appropriately. NRL and nitrile or chloroprene blends 2, 3
Synthetic polyisoprene 2

Chunk 682:
Styrenebased copolymer 4, 5
Polyurethane 4
Nonmedical Housekeeping procedures Not a medical device regulated by the FDA. NRL and nitrile or chloroprene blends 2, 3

Chunk 683:
gloves e.g., cleaning and Chloroprene neoprene 2, 3
disinfection Commonly referred to as utility, industrial, or Nitrile 2, 3
general purpose gloves. Should be puncture or Butyl rubber 2, 3

Chunk 684:
Handling contaminated chemicalresistant, depending on the task. Latex Fluoroelastomer 3, 4, 6

Chunk 685:
sharps or chemicals gloves do not provide adequate chemical Polyethylene and ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer 3, 4, 6
protection.
Not for use during patient
care Sanitize after use.

Chunk 686:
Physical properties can vary by material, manufacturer, and protein and chemical composition.

Chunk 687:
1contains allergenic NRL proteins.
2vulcanized rubber, contains allergenic rubber processing chemicals.
3likely to have enhanced chemical or puncture resistance.

Chunk 688:
4nonvulcanized and does not contain rubber processing chemicals.
5inappropriate for use with methacrylates.
6resistant to most methacrylates.

Chunk 689:
Medical or dental gloves include patientexamination gloves and surgeons i.e., surgical gloves and are medical devices regulated by the FDA. Only FDAcleared medical or

Chunk 690:
dental patientexamination gloves and surgical gloves can be used for patient care.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 19

Chunk 691:
dried before gloving, because hands still wet with an alcohol Contact Dermatitis and Latex
based hand hygiene product can increase the risk of glove per Hypersensitivity
foration 192.

Chunk 692:
foration 192.
Occupationally related contact dermatitis can develop from
FDA regulates the medical glove industry, which includes
frequent and repeated use of hand hygiene products, exposure

Chunk 693:
gloves marketed as sterile surgeons and sterile or nonsterile
to chemicals, and glove use. Contact dermatitis is classified as
patient examination gloves. Generalpurpose utility gloves are

Chunk 694:
either irritant or allergic. Irritant contact dermatitis is com
also used in dental healthcare settings but are not regulated
mon, nonallergic, and develops as dry, itchy, irritated areas on

Chunk 695:
by FDA because they are not promoted for medical use. More
the skin around the area of contact. By comparison, allergic
rigorous standards are applied to surgeons than to examina

Chunk 696:
contact dermatitis type IV hypersensitivity can result from
tion gloves. FDA has identified acceptable quality levels e.g.,
exposure to accelerators and other chemicals used in the manu

Chunk 697:
maximum defects allowed for glove manufacturers 214, but
facture of rubber gloves e.g., natural rubber latex, nitrile, and
even intact gloves eventually fail with exposure to mechanical

Chunk 698:
neoprene, as well as from other chemicals found in the dental
e.g., sharps, fingernails, or jewelry and chemical e.g.,
practice setting e.g., methacrylates and glutaraldehyde.

Chunk 699:
dimethyacrylates hazards and over time. These variables can
Allergic contact dermatitis often manifests as a rash beginning
be controlled, ultimately optimizing glove performance, by

Chunk 700:
hours after contact and, similar to irritant dermatitis, is usu
1 maintaining short fingernails, 2 minimizing or eliminat
ally confined to the area of contact.

Chunk 701:
ing hand jewelry, and 3 using engineering and workpractice
Latex allergy type I hypersensitivity to latex proteins can
controls to avoid injuries with sharps.

Chunk 702:
be a more serious systemic allergic reaction, usually beginning
Sterile Surgeons Gloves and DoubleGloving within minutes of exposure but sometimes occurring hours

Chunk 703:
During Oral Surgical Procedures later and producing varied symptoms. More common reac
tions include runny nose, sneezing, itchy eyes, scratchy throat,

Chunk 704:
Certain limited studies have determined no difference in
hives, and itchy burning skin sensations. More severe symp
postoperative infection rates after routine tooth extractions

Chunk 705:
toms include asthma marked by difficult breathing, coughing
when surgeons wore either sterile or nonsterile gloves
spells, and wheezing cardiovascular and gastrointestinal ail

Chunk 706:
215,216. However, wearing sterile surgeons gloves during
ments and in rare cases, anaphylaxis and death 32,225. The
surgical procedures is supported by a strong theoretical ratio

Chunk 707:
American Dental Association ADA began investigating the
nale 2,7,137. Sterile gloves minimize transmission of micro
prevalence of type I latex hypersensitivity among DHCP at

Chunk 708:
organisms from the hands of surgical DHCP to patients and
the ADA annual meeting in 1994. In 1994 and 1995,
prevent contamination of the hands of surgical DHCP with

Chunk 709:
approximately 2,000 dentists, hygienists, and assistants vol
the patients blood and body fluids 137. In addition, sterile
unteered for skinprick testing. Data demonstrated that 6.2

Chunk 710:
surgeons gloves are more rigorously regulated by FDA and
of those tested were positive for type I latex hypersensitivity
therefore might provide an increased level of protection for

Chunk 711:
226. Data from the subsequent 5 years of this ongoing cross
the provider if exposure to blood is likely.
sectional study indicated a decline in prevalence from 8.5 to

Chunk 712:
Although the effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves in
4.3 227. This downward trend is similar to that reported
preventing disease transmission has not been demonstrated,

Chunk 713:
by other studies and might be related to use of latex gloves
the majority of studies among HCP and DHCP have demon
with lower allergen content 228230.

Chunk 714:
strated a lower frequency of inner glove perforation and vis
Natural rubber latex proteins responsible for latex allergy
ible blood on the surgeons hands when double gloves are worn

Chunk 715:
are attached to glove powder. When powdered latex gloves are
181,185,195,196,198,217219. In one study evaluating
worn, more latex protein reaches the skin. In addition, when

Chunk 716:
double gloves during oral surgical and dental hygiene proce
powdered latex gloves are donned or removed, latex protein
dures, the perforation of outer latex gloves was greater during

Chunk 717:
powder particles become aerosolized and can be inhaled, con
longer procedures i.e., 45 minutes, with the highest rate
tacting mucous membranes 231. As a result, allergic patients

Chunk 718:
10 of perforation occurring during oral surgery procedures
and DHCP can experience cutaneous, respiratory, and con
196. Based on these studies, double gloving might provide

Chunk 719:
junctival symptoms related to latex protein exposure. DHCP
additional protection from occupational blood contact 220.
can become sensitized to latex protein with repeated exposure

Chunk 720:
Double gloving does not appear to substantially reduce either
232236. Work areas where only powderfree, lowallergen
manual dexterity or tactile sensitivity 221223. Additional

Chunk 721:
latex gloves are used demonstrate low or undetectable amounts
protection might also be provided by specialty products e.g.,
of latex allergycausing proteins 237239 and fewer symp

Chunk 722:
orthopedic surgical gloves and glove liners 224.
toms among HCP related to natural rubber latex allergy.
20 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 723:
Because of the role of glove powder in exposure to latex pro cid127 Have emergency treatment kits with latexfree products

Chunk 724:
tein, NIOSH recommends that if latex gloves are chosen, HCP available at all times.

Chunk 725:
should be provided with reduced protein, powderfree gloves cid127 If latexrelated complications occur during or after a pro

Chunk 726:
32. Nonlatex e.g., nitrile or vinyl powderfree and low cedure, manage the reaction and seek emergency assistance

Chunk 727:
protein gloves are also available 31,240. Although rare, as indicated. Follow current medical emergency response

Chunk 728:
potentially lifethreatening anaphylactic reactions to latex can recommendations for management of anaphylaxis 32.
occur dental practices should be appropriately equipped and

Chunk 729:
have procedures in place to respond to such emergencies. Sterilization and Disinfection
DHCP and dental patients with latex allergy should not have of PatientCare Items

Chunk 730:
direct contact with latexcontaining materials and should be
Patientcare items dental instruments, devices, and equip
in a latexsafe environment with all latexcontaining products

Chunk 731:
ment are categorized as critical, semicritical, or noncritical,
removed from their vicinity 31. Dental patients with histo
depending on the potential risk for infection associated with

Chunk 732:
ries of latex allergy can be at risk from dental products e.g.,
their intended use Table 4 242. Critical items used to pen
prophylaxis cups, rubber dams, orthodontic elastics, and medi

Chunk 733:
etrate soft tissue or bone have the greatest risk of transmitting
cation vials 241. Any latexcontaining devices that cannot
infection and should be sterilized by heat. Semicritical items

Chunk 734:
be removed from the treatment environment should be
touch mucous membranes or nonintact skin and have a lower
adequately covered or isolated. Persons might also be allergic

Chunk 735:
risk of transmission because the majority of semicritical items
to chemicals used in the manufacture of natural rubber latex
in dentistry are heattolerant, they also should be sterilized by

Chunk 736:
and synthetic rubber gloves as well as metals, plastics, or other
using heat. If a semicritical item is heatsensitive, it should, at
materials used in dental care. Taking thorough health histories

Chunk 737:
a minimum, be processed with highlevel disinfection 2.
for both patients and DHCP, followed by avoidance of con
Noncritical patientcare items pose the least risk of trans

Chunk 738:
tact with potential allergens can minimize the possibility of
mission of infection, contacting only intact skin, which can
adverse reactions. Certain common predisposing conditions

Chunk 739:
serve as an effective barrier to microorganisms. In the majority
for latex allergy include previous history of allergies, a history

Chunk 740:
of cases, cleaning, or if visibly soiled, cleaning followed by disin
of spina bifida, urogenital anomalies, or allergies to avocados,
fection with an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant is adequate.

Chunk 741:
kiwis, nuts, or bananas. The following precautions should be
When the item is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM,
considered to ensure safe treatment for patients who have pos

Chunk 742:
an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal
sible or documented latex allergy
claim i.e., intermediatelevel disinfectant should be used

Chunk 743:
cid127 Be aware that latent allergens in the ambient air can cause
2,243,244. Cleaning or disinfection of certain noncritical
respiratory or anaphylactic symptoms among persons with

Chunk 744:
patientcare items can be difficult or damage the surfaces there
latex hypersensitivity. Patients with latex allergy can be
fore, use of disposable barrier protection of these surfaces might

Chunk 745:
scheduled for the first appointment of the day to mini
be a preferred alternative.
mize their inadvertent exposure to airborne latex particles.
FDAcleared sterilanthighlevel disinfectants and EPA

Chunk 746:
cid127 Communicate with other DHCP regarding patients with
registered disinfectants must have clear label claims for intended
latex allergy e.g., by oral instructions, written protocols,

Chunk 747:
use, and manufacturer instructions for use must be followed
and posted signage to prevent them from bringing latex
245. A more complete description of the regulatory frame

Chunk 748:
containing materials into the treatment area.
work in the United States by which liquid chemical germi
cid127 Frequently clean all working areas contaminated with

Chunk 749:
cides are evaluated and regulated is included Appendix A.
latex powder or dust.
TABLE 4. Infectioncontrol categories of patientcare instruments
Category Definition Dental instrument or item

Chunk 750:
Critical Penetrates soft tissue, contacts bone, enters into or contacts the blood Surgical instruments, periodontal scalers, scalpel blades, surgical dental

Chunk 751:
stream or other normally sterile tissue. burs
Semicritical Contacts mucous membranes or nonintact skin will not penetrate soft Dental mouth mirror, amalgam condenser, reusable dental impression

Chunk 752:
tissue, contact bone, enter into or contact the bloodstream or other trays, dental handpieces
normally sterile tissue.

Chunk 753:
Noncritical Contacts intact skin. Radiograph headcone, blood pressure cuff, facebow, pulse oximeter

Chunk 754:
Although dental handpieces are considered a semicritical item, they should always be heatsterilized between uses and not highlevel disinfected 246. See Dental Handpieces

Chunk 755:
and Other Devices Attached to Air or Waterlines for detailed information.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 21

Chunk 756:
Three levels of disinfection, high, intermediate, and low, are and sterilization processes it should involve removal of debris

Chunk 757:
used for patientcare devices that do not require sterility and as well as organic and inorganic contamination. Removal of

Chunk 758:
two levels, intermediate and low, for environmental surfaces debris and contamination is achieved either by scrubbing with

Chunk 759:
242. The intended use of the patientcare item should deter a surfactant, detergent, and water, or by an automated process

Chunk 760:
mine the recommended level of disinfection. Dental practices e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washerdisinfector using chemical

Chunk 761:
should follow the product manufacturers directions regarding agents. If visible debris, whether inorganic or organic matter, is

Chunk 762:
concentrations and exposure time for disinfectant activity rela not removed, it will interfere with microbial inactivation and

Chunk 763:
tive to the surface to be disinfected 245. A summary of ster can compromise the disinfection or sterilization process

Chunk 764:
ilization and disinfection methods is included Appendix C. 244,249252. After cleaning, instruments should be rinsed
with water to remove chemical or detergent residue. Splashing

Chunk 765:
Transporting and Processing Contaminated
should be minimized during cleaning and rinsing 13. Before
Critical and Semicritical PatientCare Items

Chunk 766:
final disinfection or sterilization, instruments should be handled
DHCP can be exposed to microorganisms on contaminated as though contaminated.

Chunk 767:
instruments and devices through percutaneous injury, contact Considerations in selecting cleaning methods and equipment

Chunk 768:
with nonintact skin on the hands, or contact with mucous include 1 efficacy of the method, process, and equipment

Chunk 769:
membranes of the eyes, nose, or mouth. Contaminated 2 compatibility with items to be cleaned and 3 occupational

Chunk 770:
instruments should be handled carefully to prevent exposure health and exposure risks. Use of automated cleaning equip

Chunk 771:
to sharp instruments that can cause a percutaneous injury. ment e.g., ultrasonic cleaner or washerdisinfector does not

Chunk 772:
Instruments should be placed in an appropriate container at require presoaking or scrubbing of instruments and can

Chunk 773:
the point of use to prevent percutaneous injuries during trans increase productivity, improve cleaning effectiveness, and

Chunk 774:
port to the instrument processing area 13. decrease worker exposure to blood and body fluids. Thus,

Chunk 775:
Instrument processing requires multiple steps to achieve ster using automated equipment can be safer and more efficient

Chunk 776:
ilization or highlevel disinfection. Sterilization is a complex than manually cleaning contaminated instruments 253.

Chunk 777:
process requiring specialized equipment, adequate space, quali If manual cleaning is not performed immediately, placing

Chunk 778:
fied DHCP who are provided with ongoing training, and regu instruments in a punctureresistant container and soaking them

Chunk 779:
lar monitoring for quality assurance 247. Correct cleaning, with detergent, a disinfectantdetergent, or an enzymatic

Chunk 780:
packaging, sterilizer loading procedures, sterilization methods, cleaner will prevent drying of patient material and make clean

Chunk 781:
or highlevel disinfection methods should be followed to ing easier and less timeconsuming. Use of a liquid chemical

Chunk 782:
ensure that an instrument is adequately processed and safe for sterilanthighlevel disinfectant e.g., glutaraldehyde as a hold

Chunk 783:
reuse on patients. ing solution is not recommended 244. Using workpractice
controls e.g., longhandled brush to keep the scrubbing hand
Instrument Processing Area

Chunk 784:
away from sharp instruments is recommended 14. To avoid
DHCP should process all instruments in a designated cen
injury from sharp instruments, DHCP should wear puncture

Chunk 785:
tral processing area to more easily control quality and ensure
resistant, heavyduty utility gloves when handling or manu
safety 248. The central processing area should be divided

Chunk 786:
ally cleaning contaminated instruments and devices 6.
into sections for 1 receiving, cleaning, and decontamination
Employees should not reach into trays or containers holding

Chunk 787:
2 preparation and packaging 3 sterilization and 4 storage.
sharp instruments that cannot be seen e.g., sinks filled with
Ideally, walls or partitions should separate the sections to con

Chunk 788:
soapy water in which sharp instruments have been placed.
trol traffic flow and contain contaminants generated during
Workpractice controls should include use of a strainertype

Chunk 789:
processing. When physical separation of these sections cannot
basket to hold instruments and forceps to remove the items.
be achieved, adequate spatial separation might be satisfactory

Chunk 790:
Because splashing is likely to occur, a mask, protective eyewear
if the DHCP who process instruments are trained in work
or face shield, and gown or jacket should be worn 13.

Chunk 791:
practices to prevent contamination of clean areas 248. Space
should be adequate for the volume of work anticipated and Preparation and Packaging

Chunk 792:
the items to be stored 248. In another section of the processing area, cleaned instru
ments and other dental supplies should be inspected, assembled
Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination

Chunk 793:
into sets or trays, and wrapped, packaged, or placed into con
Reusable instruments, supplies, and equipment should be
tainer systems for sterilization. Hinged instruments should be

Chunk 794:
received, sorted, cleaned, and decontaminated in one section
processed open and unlocked. An internal chemical indicator
of the processing area. Cleaning should precede all disinfection

Chunk 795:
should be placed in every package. In addition, an external
22 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 796:
chemical indicator e.g., chemical indicator tape should be cal or physical parameters of the sterilization process e.g., time,

Chunk 797:
used when the internal indicator cannot be seen from outside temperature, and pressure. Consult with the sterilizer manu

Chunk 798:
the package. For unwrapped loads, at a minimum, an internal facturer regarding selection and use of indicators.

Chunk 799:
chemical indicator should be placed in the tray or cassette with Steam Sterilization. Among sterilization methods, steam

Chunk 800:
items to be sterilized 254 see Sterilization of Unwrapped sterilization, which is dependable and economical, is the most

Chunk 801:
Instruments. Dental practices should refer to the widely used for wrapped and unwrapped critical and

Chunk 802:
manufacturers instructions regarding use and correct place semicritical items that are not sensitive to heat and moisture

Chunk 803:
ment of chemical indicators see Sterilization Monitoring. 260. Steam sterilization requires exposure of each item to

Chunk 804:
Critical and semicritical instruments that will be stored should direct steam contact at a required temperature and pressure

Chunk 805:
be wrapped or placed in containers e.g., cassettes or organiz for a specified time needed to kill microorganisms. Two basic

Chunk 806:
ing trays designed to maintain sterility during storage types of steam sterilizers are the gravity displacement and the
2,247,255257. highspeed prevacuum sterilizer.

Chunk 807:
Packaging materials e.g., wraps or container systems allow The majority of tabletop sterilizers used in a dental practice

Chunk 808:
penetration of the sterilization agent and maintain sterility of are gravity displacement sterilizers, although prevacuum ster

Chunk 809:
the processed item after sterilization. Materials for maintain ilizers are becoming more widely available. In gravity displace

Chunk 810:
ing sterility of instruments during transport and storage ment sterilizers, steam is admitted through steam lines, a steam

Chunk 811:
include wrapped perforated instrument cassettes, peel pouches generator, or selfgeneration of steam within the chamber.

Chunk 812:
of plastic or paper, and sterilization wraps i.e., woven and Unsaturated air is forced out of the chamber through a vent in

Chunk 813:
nonwoven. Packaging materials should be designed for the the chamber wall. Trapping of air is a concern when using

Chunk 814:
type of sterilization process being used 256259. saturated steam under gravity displacement errors in packag
ing items or overloading the sterilizer chamber can result in
Sterilization

Chunk 815:
Sterilization
cool air pockets and items not being sterilized.
The sterilization section of the processing area should Prevacuum sterilizers are fitted with a pump to create a

Chunk 816:
include the sterilizers and related supplies, with adequate space vacuum in the chamber and ensure air removal from the ster

Chunk 817:
for loading, unloading, and cool down. The area can also ilizing chamber before the chamber is pressurized with steam.

Chunk 818:
include incubators for analyzing spore tests and enclosed stor Relative to gravity displacement, this procedure allows faster

Chunk 819:
age for sterile items and disposable singleuse items 260. and more positive steam penetration throughout the entire

Chunk 820:
Manufacturer and local building code specifications will load. Prevacuum sterilizers should be tested periodically for

Chunk 821:
determine placement and room ventilation requirements. adequate air removal, as recommended by the manufacturer.

Chunk 822:
Sterilization Procedures. Heattolerant dental instruments Air not removed from the chamber will interfere with steam

Chunk 823:
usually are sterilized by 1 steam under pressure autoclaving, contact. If a sterilizer fails the air removal test, it should not be

Chunk 824:
2 dry heat, or 3 unsaturated chemical vapor. All sterilization used until inspected by sterilizer maintenance personnel and

Chunk 825:
should be performed by using medical sterilization equipment it passes the test 243,247. Manufacturers instructions, with

Chunk 826:
cleared by FDA. The sterilization times, temperatures, and specific details regarding operation and user maintenance

Chunk 827:
other operating parameters recommended by the manufac information, should be followed.

Chunk 828:
turer of the equipment used, as well as instructions for correct Unsaturated ChemicalVapor Sterilization. Unsaturated

Chunk 829:
use of containers, wraps, and chemical or biological indica chemicalvapor sterilization involves heating a chemical solu

Chunk 830:
tors, should always be followed 243,247. tion of primarily alcohol with 0.23 formaldehyde in a closed

Chunk 831:
Items to be sterilized should be arranged to permit free cir pressurized chamber. Unsaturated chemical vapor sterilization

Chunk 832:
culation of the sterilizing agent e.g., steam, chemical vapor, of carbon steel instruments e.g., dental burs causes less cor

Chunk 833:
or dry heat manufacturers instructions for loading the steril rosion than steam sterilization because of the low level of

Chunk 834:
izer should be followed 248,260. Instrument packs should water present during the cycle. Instruments should be dry

Chunk 835:
be allowed to dry inside the sterilizer chamber before remov before sterilizing. State and local authorities should be con

Chunk 836:
ing and handling. Packs should not be touched until they are sulted for hazardous waste disposal requirements for the steril

Chunk 837:
cool and dry because hot packs act as wicks, absorbing mois izing solution.
ture, and hence, bacteria from hands 247. The ability of DryHeat Sterilization. Dry heat is used to sterilize mate

Chunk 838:
equipment to attain physical parameters required to achieve rials that might be damaged by moist heat e.g., burs and cer

Chunk 839:
sterilization should be monitored by mechanical, chemical, tain orthodontic instruments. Although dry heat has the

Chunk 840:
and biological indicators. Sterilizers vary in their types of advantages of low operating cost and being noncorrosive, it is
indicators and their ability to provide readings on the mechani

Chunk 841:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 23
a prolonged process and the high temperatures required are ing the risk of contaminating unwrapped instruments should

Chunk 842:
not suitable for certain patientcare items and devices 261. be prepared and followed 260.

Chunk 843:
Dryheat sterilizers used in dentistry include staticair and Other Sterilization Methods. Heatsensitive critical and
forcedair types. semicritical instruments and devices can be sterilized by

Chunk 844:
cid127 The staticair type is commonly called an oventype steril immersing them in liquid chemical germicides registered by

Chunk 845:
izer. Heating coils in the bottom or sides of the unit cause hot FDA as sterilants. When using a liquid chemical germicide for

Chunk 846:
air to rise inside the chamber through natural convection. sterilization, certain poststerilization procedures are essential.

Chunk 847:
cid127 The forcedair type is also known as a rapid heattransfer Items need to be 1 rinsed with sterile water after removal to

Chunk 848:
sterilizer. Heated air is circulated throughout the chamber remove toxic or irritating residues 2 handled using sterile

Chunk 849:
at a high velocity, permitting more rapid transfer of gloves and dried with sterile towels and 3 delivered to the

Chunk 850:
energy from the air to the instruments, thereby reducing point of use in an aseptic manner. If stored before use, the

Chunk 851:
the time needed for sterilization. instrument should not be considered sterile and should be ster

Chunk 852:
Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments. An unwrapped ilized again just before use. In addition, the sterilization pro

Chunk 853:
cycle sometimes called flash sterilization is a method for ster cess with liquid chemical sterilants cannot be verified with

Chunk 854:
ilizing unwrapped patientcare items for immediate use. The biological indicators 263.

Chunk 855:
time required for unwrapped sterilization cycles depends on Because of these limitations and because liquid chemical ste

Chunk 856:
the type of sterilizer and the type of item i.e., porous or non rilants can require approximately 12 hours of complete

Chunk 857:
porous to be sterilized 243. The unwrapped cycle in table immersion, they are almost never used to sterilize instruments.

Chunk 858:
top sterilizers is preprogrammed by the manufacturer to a Rather, these chemicals are more often used for highlevel dis

Chunk 859:
specific time and temperature setting and can include a drying infection 249. Shorter immersion times 1290 minutes are

Chunk 860:
phase at the end to produce a dry instrument with much of used to achieve highlevel disinfection of semicritical instru

Chunk 861:
the heat dissipated. If the drying phase requirements are unclear, ments or items. These powerful, sporicidal chemicals e.g., glu

Chunk 862:
the operation manual or manufacturer of the sterilizer should taraldehyde, peracetic acid, and hydrogen peroxide are highly

Chunk 863:
be consulted. If the unwrapped sterilization cycle in a steam toxic 244,264,265. Manufacturer instructions e.g., regard

Chunk 864:
sterilizer does not include a drying phase, or has only a mini ing dilution, immersion time, and temperature and safety

Chunk 865:
mal drying phase, items retrieved from the sterilizer will be precautions for using chemical sterilantshighlevel disinfec

Chunk 866:
hot and wet, making aseptic transport to the point of use more tants must be followed precisely 15,245. These chemicals

Chunk 867:
difficult. For dryheat and chemicalvapor sterilizers, a drying should not be used for applications other than those indicated

Chunk 868:
phase is not required. in their label instructions. Misapplications include use as an
Unwrapped sterilization should be used only under certain environmental surface disinfectant or instrumentholding

Chunk 869:
conditions 1 thorough cleaning and drying of instruments solution.
precedes the unwrapped sterilization cycle 2 mechanical When using appropriate precautions e.g., closed contain

Chunk 870:
monitors are checked and chemical indicators used for each ers to limit vapor release, chemically resistant gloves and aprons,

Chunk 871:
cycle 3 care is taken to avoid thermal injury to DHCP or goggles, and face shields, glutaraldehydebased products can

Chunk 872:
patients and 4 items are transported aseptically to the point be used without tissue irritation or adverse health effects. How

Chunk 873:
of use to maintain sterility 134,258,262. Because all implant ever, dermatologic, eye irritation, respiratory effects, and skin

Chunk 874:
able devices should be quarantined after sterilization until the sensitization have been reported 266268. Because of their

Chunk 875:
results of biological monitoring are known, unwrapped or flash lack of chemical resistance to glutaraldehydes, medical gloves

Chunk 876:
sterilization of implantable items is not recommended 134. are not an effective barrier 200,269,270. Other factors might

Chunk 877:
Critical instruments sterilized unwrapped should be trans apply e.g., room exhaust ventilation or 10 air exchangeshour

Chunk 878:
ferred immediately by using aseptic technique, from the steril to ensure DHCP safety 266,271. For all of these reasons,

Chunk 879:
izer to the actual point of use. Critical instruments should not using heatsensitive semicritical items that must be processed

Chunk 880:
be stored unwrapped 260. Semicritical instruments that are with liquid chemical germicides is discouraged heattolerant

Chunk 881:
sterilized unwrapped on a tray or in a container system should or disposable alternatives are available for the majority of such
be used immediately or within a short time. When sterile items items.

Chunk 882:
are open to the air, they will eventually become contaminated. Lowtemperature sterilization with ethylene oxide gas ETO

Chunk 883:
Storage, even temporary, of unwrapped semicritical instruments has been used extensively in larger healthcare facilities. Its

Chunk 884:
is discouraged because it permits exposure to dust, airborne primary advantage is the ability to sterilize heat and mois

Chunk 885:
organisms, and other unnecessary contamination before use turesensitive patientcare items with reduced deleterious

Chunk 886:
on a patient 260. A carefully written protocol for minimiz effects. However, extended sterilization times of 1048 hours
24 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 887:
and potential hazards to patients and DHCP requiring strin Because chemical indicator test results are received when the

Chunk 888:
gent health and safety requirements 272274 make this sterilization cycle is complete, they can provide an early indi

Chunk 889:
method impractical for privatepractice settings. Handpieces cation of a problem and where in the process the problem

Chunk 890:
cannot be effectively sterilized with this method because of might exist. If either mechanical indicators or internal or

Chunk 891:
decreased penetration of ETO gas flow through a small lumen external chemical indicators indicate inadequate processing,

Chunk 892:
250,275. Other types of lowtemperature sterilization e.g., items in the load should not be used until reprocessed 134.

Chunk 893:
hydrogen peroxide gas plasma exist but are not yet practical Biological indicators BIs i.e., spore tests are the most
for dental offices. accepted method for monitoring the sterilization process

Chunk 894:
Bead sterilizers have been used in dentistry to sterilize small 278,279 because they assess it directly by killing known highly

Chunk 895:
metallic instruments e.g., endodontic files. FDA has deter resistant microorganisms e.g., Geobacillus or Bacillus species,

Chunk 896:
mined that a risk of infection exists with these devices because rather than merely testing the physical and chemical condi

Chunk 897:
of their potential failure to sterilize dental instruments and has tions necessary for sterilization 243. Because spores used in

Chunk 898:
required their commercial distribution cease unless the manu BIs are more resistant and present in greater numbers than the

Chunk 899:
facturer files a premarket approval application. If a bead steril common microbial contaminants found on patientcare equip

Chunk 900:
izer is employed, DHCP assume the risk of employing a ment, an inactivated BI indicates other potential pathogens in

Chunk 901:
dental device FDA has deemed neither safe nor effective 276. the load have been killed 280.

Chunk 902:
Sterilization Monitoring. Monitoring of sterilization pro Correct functioning of sterilization cycles should be verified

Chunk 903:
cedures should include a combination of process parameters, for each sterilizer by the periodic use at least weekly of BIs

Chunk 904:
including mechanical, chemical, and biological 247,248,277. 2,9,134,243,278,279. Every load containing implantable

Chunk 905:
These parameters evaluate both the sterilizing conditions and devices should be monitored with such indicators 248, and

Chunk 906:
the procedures effectiveness. the items quarantined until BI results are known. However, in

Chunk 907:
Mechanical techniques for monitoring sterilization include an emergency, placing implantable items in quarantine until

Chunk 908:
assessing cycle time, temperature, and pressure by observing spore tests are known to be negative might be impossible.

Chunk 909:
the gauges or displays on the sterilizer and noting these Manufacturers directions should determine the placement

Chunk 910:
parameters for each load 243,248. Some tabletop sterilizers and location of BI in the sterilizer. A control BI, from the

Chunk 911:
have recording devices that print out these parameters. Cor same lot as the test indicator and not processed through the

Chunk 912:
rect readings do not ensure sterilization, but incorrect read sterilizer, should be incubated with the test BI the control BI

Chunk 913:
ings can be the first indication of a problem with the should yield positive results for bacterial growth.
sterilization cycle. Inoffice biological monitoring is available mailin steril

Chunk 914:
Chemical indicators, internal and external, use sensitive ization monitoring services e.g., from private companies or

Chunk 915:
chemicals to assess physical conditions e.g., time and tem dental schools can also be used to test both the BI and the

Chunk 916:
perature during the sterilization process. Although chemical control. Although some DHCP have expressed concern that

Chunk 917:
indicators do not prove sterilization has been achieved, they delays caused by mailing specimens might cause falsenegatives,

Chunk 918:
allow detection of certain equipment malfunctions, and they studies have determined that mail delays have no substantial

Chunk 919:
can help identify procedural errors. External indicators applied effect on final test results 281,282.

Chunk 920:
to the outside of a package e.g., chemical indicator tape or Procedures to follow in the event of a positive spore test

Chunk 921:
special markings change color rapidly when a specific param have been developed 243,247. If the mechanical e.g., time,

Chunk 922:
eter is reached, and they verify that the package has been temperature, and pressure and chemical i.e., internal or

Chunk 923:
exposed to the sterilization process. Internal chemical indica external indicators demonstrate that the sterilizer is function

Chunk 924:
tors should be used inside each package to ensure the steriliz ing correctly, a single positive spore test probably does not

Chunk 925:
ing agent has penetrated the packaging material and actually indicate sterilizer malfunction. Items other than implantable

Chunk 926:
reached the instruments inside. A singleparameter internal devices do not necessarily need to be recalled however the

Chunk 927:
chemical indicator provides information regarding only one spore test should be repeated immediately after correctly load

Chunk 928:
sterilization parameter e.g., time or temperature. Multipa ing the sterilizer and using the same cycle that produced the

Chunk 929:
rameter internal chemical indicators are designed to react to failure. The sterilizer should be removed from service, and all

Chunk 930:
2 parameters e.g., time and temperature or time, tempera records reviewed of chemical and mechanical monitoring since

Chunk 931:
ture, and the presence of steam and can provide a more reli the last negative BI test. Also, sterilizer operating procedures

Chunk 932:
able indication that sterilization conditions have been met should be reviewed, including packaging, loading, and spore

Chunk 933:
254. Multiparameter internal indicators are available only testing, with all persons who work with the sterilizer to deter

Chunk 934:
for steam sterilizers i.e., autoclaves. mine whether operator error could be responsible 9,243,247.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 25

Chunk 935:
Overloading, failure to provide adequate package separation, Although some healthcare facilities continue to date every

Chunk 936:
and incorrect or excessive packaging material are all common sterilized package and use shelflife practices, other facilities

Chunk 937:
reasons for a positive BI in the absence of mechanical failure have switched to eventrelated practices 243. This approach

Chunk 938:
of the sterilizer unit 260. A second monitored sterilizer in recognizes that the product should remain sterile indefinitely,

Chunk 939:
the office can be used, or a loaner from a sales or repair com unless an event causes it to become contaminated e.g., torn

Chunk 940:
pany obtained, to minimize office disruption while waiting or wet packaging 284. Even for eventrelated packaging,
for the repeat BI. minimally, the date of sterilization should be placed on the

Chunk 941:
If the repeat test is negative and chemical and mechanical package, and if multiple sterilizers are used in the facility, the

Chunk 942:
monitoring indicate adequate processing, the sterilizer can be sterilizer used should be indicated on the outside of the pack

Chunk 943:
put back into service. If the repeat BI test is positive, and pack aging material to facilitate the retrieval of processed items in

Chunk 944:
aging, loading, and operating procedures have been confirmed the event of a sterilization failure 247. If packaging is com

Chunk 945:
as performing correctly, the sterilizer should remain out of ser promised, the instruments should be recleaned, packaged in

Chunk 946:
vice until it has been inspected, repaired, and rechallenged with new wrap, and sterilized again.

Chunk 947:
BI tests in three consecutive empty chamber sterilization cycles Clean supplies and instruments should be stored in closed

Chunk 948:
9,243. When possible, items from suspect loads dating back or covered cabinets, if possible 285. Dental supplies and

Chunk 949:
to the last negative BI should be recalled, rewrapped, and instruments should not be stored under sinks or in other loca
resterilized 9,283. tions where they might become wet.

Chunk 950:
A more conservative approach has been recommended 247
in which any positive spore test is assumed to represent steril Environmental Infection Control

Chunk 951:
izer malfunction and requires that all materials processed in
In the dental operatory, environmental surfaces i.e., a sur
that sterilizer, dating from the sterilization cycle having the

Chunk 952:
face or equipment that does not contact patients directly can
last negative biologic indicator to the next cycle indicating sat
become contaminated during patient care. Certain surfaces,

Chunk 953:
isfactory biologic indicator results, should be considered
especially ones touched frequently e.g., light handles, unit
nonsterile and retrieved, if possible, and reprocessed or held in

Chunk 954:
switches, and drawer knobs can serve as reservoirs of micro
quarantine until the results of the repeat BI are known. This
bial contamination, although they have not been associated

Chunk 955:
approach is considered conservative because the margin of
directly with transmission of infection to either DHCP or
safety in steam sterilization is sufficient enough that infection

Chunk 956:
patients. Transfer of microorganisms from contaminated
risk, associated with items in a load indicating spore growth, is
environmental surfaces to patients occurs primarily through

Chunk 957:
minimal, particularly if the item was properly cleaned and the
DHCP hand contact 286,287. When these surfaces are
temperature was achieved e.g., as demonstrated by accept

Chunk 958:
touched, microbial agents can be transferred to instruments,
able chemical indicator or temperature chart 243. Published
other environmental surfaces, or to the nose, mouth, or eyes

Chunk 959:
studies are not available that document disease transmission
of workers or patients. Although hand hygiene is key to mini
through a nonretrieved surgical instrument after a steam ster

Chunk 960:
mizing this transferal, barrier protection or cleaning and dis
ilization cycle with a positive biological indicator 243. This
infecting of environmental surfaces also protects against

Chunk 961:
more conservative approach should always be used for steril
healthcareassociated infections.
ization methods other than steam e.g., dry heat, unsaturated

Chunk 962:
Environmental surfaces can be divided into clinical contact
chemical vapor, ETO, or hydrogen peroxide gas plasma 243.
surfaces and housekeeping surfaces 249. Because housekeep

Chunk 963:
Results of biological monitoring should be recorded and ster
ing surfaces e.g., floors, walls, and sinks have limited risk of
ilization monitoring records i.e., mechanical, chemical, and

Chunk 964:
disease transmission, they can be decontaminated with less rig
biological retained long enough to comply with state and
orous methods than those used on dental patientcare items

Chunk 965:
local regulations. Such records are a component of an overall
and clinical contact surfaces 244. Strategies for cleaning and
dental infectioncontrol program see Program Evaluation.

Chunk 966:
disinfecting surfaces in patientcare areas should consider the
Storage of Sterilized Items and Clean Dental 1 potential for direct patient contact 2 degree and frequency

Chunk 967:
Supplies of hand contact and 3 potential contamination of the sur
face with body substances or environmental sources of micro
The storage area should contain enclosed storage for sterile

Chunk 968:
organisms e.g., soil, dust, or water.
items and disposable singleuse items 173. Storage prac
Cleaning is the necessary first step of any disinfection pro

Chunk 969:
tices for wrapped sterilized instruments can be either date or
cess. Cleaning is a form of decontamination that renders the
eventrelated. Packages containing sterile supplies should be

Chunk 970:
environmental surface safe by removing organic matter, salts,
inspected before use to verify barrier integrity and dryness.
26 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 971:
and visible soils, all of which interfere with microbial inactiva if surfaces have become contaminated since their last cleaning

Chunk 972:
tion. The physical action of scrubbing with detergents and 13. To facilitate daily cleaning, treatment areas should be

Chunk 973:
surfactants and rinsing with water removes substantial num kept free of unnecessary equipment and supplies.

Chunk 974:
bers of microorganisms. If a surface is not cleaned first, the Manufacturers of dental devices and equipment should pro

Chunk 975:
success of the disinfection process can be compromised. vide information regarding material compatibility with liquid

Chunk 976:
Removal of all visible blood and inorganic and organic matter chemical germicides, whether equipment can be safely

Chunk 977:
can be as critical as the germicidal activity of the disinfecting immersed for cleaning, and how it should be decontaminated

Chunk 978:
agent 249. When a surface cannot be cleaned adequately, it if servicing is required 289. Because of the risks associated

Chunk 979:
should be protected with barriers 2. with exposure to chemical disinfectants and contaminated sur
faces, DHCP who perform environmental cleaning and disin
Clinical Contact Surfaces

Chunk 980:
fection should wear gloves and other PPE to prevent
Clinical contact surfaces can be directly contaminated from occupational exposure to infectious agents and hazardous

Chunk 981:
patient materials either by direct spray or spatter generated chemicals. Chemical and punctureresistant utility gloves

Chunk 982:
during dental procedures or by contact with DHCPs gloved offer more protection than patient examination gloves when
hands. These surfaces can subsequently contaminate other using hazardous chemicals.

Chunk 983:
instruments, devices, hands, or gloves. Examples of such sur
Housekeeping Surfaces
faces include
cid127 light handles, Evidence does not support that housekeeping surfaces e.g.,

Chunk 984:
cid127 switches, floors, walls, and sinks pose a risk for disease transmission in
cid127 dental radiograph equipment, dental healthcare settings. Actual, physical removal of micro

Chunk 985:
cid127 dental chairside computers, organisms and soil by wiping or scrubbing is probably as criti

Chunk 986:
cid127 reusable containers of dental materials, cal, if not more so, than any antimicrobial effect provided by
cid127 drawer handles, the agent used 244,290. The majority of housekeeping sur

Chunk 987:
cid127 faucet handles, faces need to be cleaned only with a detergent and water or an
cid127 countertops, EPAregistered hospital disinfectantdetergent, depending on

Chunk 988:
cid127 pens, the nature of the surface and the type and degree of contami
cid127 telephones, and nation. Schedules and methods vary according to the area e.g.,

Chunk 989:
cid127 doorknobs. dental operatory, laboratory, bathrooms, or reception rooms,
Barrier protection of surfaces and equipment can prevent surface, and amount and type of contamination.

Chunk 990:
contamination of clinical contact surfaces, but is particularly Floors should be cleaned regularly, and spills should be

Chunk 991:
effective for those that are difficult to clean. Barriers include cleaned up promptly. An EPAregistered hospital disinfectant

Chunk 992:
clear plastic wrap, bags, sheets, tubing, and plasticbacked detergent designed for general housekeeping purposes should

Chunk 993:
paper or other materials impervious to moisture 260,288. be used in patientcare areas if uncertainty exists regarding the

Chunk 994:
Because such coverings can become contaminated, they should nature of the soil on the surface e.g., blood or body fluid

Chunk 995:
be removed and discarded between patients, while DHCP are contamination versus routine dust or dirt. Unless contami

Chunk 996:
still gloved. After removing the barrier, examine the surface to nation is reasonably anticipated or apparent, cleaning or dis

Chunk 997:
make sure it did not become soiled inadvertently. The surface infecting walls, window drapes, and other vertical surfaces is

Chunk 998:
needs to be cleaned and disinfected only if contamination is unnecessary. However, when housekeeping surfaces are visibly

Chunk 999:
evident. Otherwise, after removing gloves and performing hand contaminated by blood or OPIM, prompt removal and sur

Chunk 1000:
hygiene, DHCP should place clean barriers on these surfaces face disinfection is appropriate infectioncontrol practice and
before the next patient 1,2,288. required by OSHA 13.

Chunk 1001:
If barriers are not used, surfaces should be cleaned and dis Part of the cleaning strategy is to minimize contamination

Chunk 1002:
infected between patients by using an EPAregistered hospital of cleaning solutions and cleaning tools e.g., mop heads or

Chunk 1003:
disinfectant with an HIV, HBV claim i.e., lowlevel disinfec cleaning cloths. Mops and cloths should be cleaned after use

Chunk 1004:
tant or a tuberculocidal claim i.e., intermediatelevel disin and allowed to dry before reuse, or singleuse, disposable mop

Chunk 1005:
fectant. Intermediatelevel disinfectant should be used when heads and cloths should be used to avoid spreading contami

Chunk 1006:
the surface is visibly contaminated with blood or OPIM nation. Cost, safety, productsurface compatibility, and accept

Chunk 1007:
2,244. Also, general cleaning and disinfection are recom ability by housekeepers can be key criteria for selecting a

Chunk 1008:
mended for clinical contact surfaces, dental unit surfaces, and cleaning agent or an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant
countertops at the end of daily work activities and are required

Chunk 1009:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 27
detergent. PPE used during cleaning and housekeeping proce aged e.g., dental operatory, laboratory, or instrument process

Chunk 1010:
dures followed should be appropriate to the task. ing areas. For these reasons, use of carpeted flooring and fab

Chunk 1011:
In the cleaning process, another reservoir for microorgan ricupholstered furnishings in these areas should be avoided.
isms can be dilute solutions of detergents or disinfectants,

Chunk 1012:
Nonregulated and Regulated Medical Waste
especially if prepared in dirty containers, stored for long peri

Chunk 1013:
ods of time, or prepared incorrectly 244. Manufacturers Studies have compared microbial load and diversity of

Chunk 1014:
instructions for preparation and use should be followed. Mak microorganisms in residential waste with waste from multiple

Chunk 1015:
ing fresh cleaning solution each day, discarding any remaining healthcare settings. General waste from hospitals or other

Chunk 1016:
solution, and allowing the container to dry will minimize bac healthcare facilities e.g., dental practices or clinicalresearch

Chunk 1017:
terial contamination. Preferred cleaning methods produce laboratories is no more infective than residential waste

Chunk 1018:
minimal mists and aerosols or dispersion of dust in patient 296,297. The majority of soiled items in dental offices are
care areas. general medical waste and thus can be disposed of with ordi

Chunk 1019:
nary waste. Examples include used gloves, masks, gowns, lightly
Cleaning and Disinfection Strategies
soiled gauze or cotton rolls, and environmental barriers e.g.,
for Blood Spills

Chunk 1020:
for Blood Spills
plastic sheets or bags used to cover equipment during treat
The majority of blood contamination events in dentistry ment 298.

Chunk 1021:
result from spatter during dental procedures using rotary or Although any item that has had contact with blood, exu

Chunk 1022:
ultrasonic instrumentation. Although no evidence supports dates, or secretions might be infective, treating all such waste

Chunk 1023:
that HBV, HCV, or HIV have been transmitted from a house as infective is neither necessary nor practical 244. Infectious

Chunk 1024:
keeping surface, prompt removal and surface disinfection of waste that carries a substantial risk of causing infection during

Chunk 1025:
an area contaminated by either blood or OPIM are appropri handling and disposal is regulated medical waste. A complete

Chunk 1026:
ate infectioncontrol practices and required by OSHA 13,291. definition of regulated waste is included in OSHAs bloodborne

Chunk 1027:
Strategies for decontaminating spills of blood and other body pathogens standard 13.

Chunk 1028:
fluids differ by setting and volume of the spill 113,244. Blood Regulated medical waste is only a limited subset of waste

Chunk 1029:
spills on either clinical contact or housekeeping surfaces should 915 of total waste in hospitals and 12 of total waste

Chunk 1030:
be contained and managed as quickly as possible to reduce the in dental offices 298,299. Regulated medical waste requires

Chunk 1031:
risk of contact by patients and DHCP 244,292. The person special storage, handling, neutralization, and disposal and is

Chunk 1032:
assigned to clean the spill should wear gloves and other PPE as covered by federal, state, and local rules and regulations

Chunk 1033:
needed. Visible organic material should be removed with 6,297,300,301. Examples of regulated waste found in den

Chunk 1034:
absorbent material e.g., disposable paper towels discarded in talpractice settings are solid waste soaked or saturated with

Chunk 1035:
a leakproof, appropriately labeled container. Nonporous sur blood or saliva e.g., gauze saturated with blood after surgery,

Chunk 1036:
faces should be cleaned and then decontaminated with either extracted teeth, surgically removed hard and soft tissues, and

Chunk 1037:
an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant effective against HBV contaminated sharp items e.g., needles, scalpel blades, and
and HIV or an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant with a wires 13.

Chunk 1038:
tuberculocidal claim i.e., intermediatelevel disinfectant. If Regulated medical waste requires careful containment for

Chunk 1039:
sodium hypochlorite is chosen, an EPAregistered sodium treatment or disposal. A single leakresistant biohazard bag is

Chunk 1040:
hypochlorite product is preferred. However, if such products usually adequate for containment of nonsharp regulated medi

Chunk 1041:
are unavailable, a 1100 dilution of sodium hypochlorite e.g., cal waste, provided the bag is sturdy and the waste can be

Chunk 1042:
approximately ¼ cup of 5.25 household chlorine bleach to discarded without contaminating the bags exterior. Exterior

Chunk 1043:
1 gallon of water is an inexpensive and effective disinfecting contamination or puncturing of the bag requires placement in
agent 113. a second biohazard bag. All bags should be securely closed for

Chunk 1044:
disposal. Punctureresistant containers with a biohazard label,
Carpeting and Cloth Furnishings
located at the point of use i.e., sharps containers, are used as

Chunk 1045:
Carpeting is more difficult to clean than nonporous hard containment for scalpel blades, needles, syringes, and unused
surface flooring, and it cannot be reliably disinfected, espe sterile sharps 13.

Chunk 1046:
cially after spills of blood and body substances. Studies have Dental healthcare facilities should dispose of medical waste

Chunk 1047:
documented the presence of diverse microbial populations, regularly to avoid accumulation. Any facility generating regu

Chunk 1048:
primarily bacteria and fungi, in carpeting 293295. Cloth lated medical waste should have a plan for its management

Chunk 1049:
furnishings pose similar contamination risks in areas of direct that complies with federal, state, and local regulations to

Chunk 1050:
patient care and places where contaminated materials are man ensure health and environmental safety.
28 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1051:
Discharging Blood or Other Body Fluids sols 324. Healthcareassociated transmission of pathogenic
to Sanitary Sewers or Septic Tanks agents e.g., Legionella species occurs primarily through inha

Chunk 1052:
lation of infectious aerosols generated from potable water
All containers with blood or saliva e.g., suctioned fluids
sources or through use of tap water in respiratory therapy equip

Chunk 1053:
can be inactivated in accordance with stateapproved treat
ment 325327. Disease outbreaks in the community have
ment technologies, or the contents can be carefully poured

Chunk 1054:
also been reported from diverse environmental aerosol
down a utility sink, drain, or toilet 6. Appropriate PPE e.g.,
producing sources, including whirlpool spas 328, swimming

Chunk 1055:
gloves, gown, mask, and protective eyewear should be worn
pools 329, and a grocery store mist machine 330. Although
when performing this task 13. No evidence exists that

Chunk 1056:
the majority of these outbreaks are associated with species of
bloodborne diseases have been transmitted from contact with
Legionella and Pseudomonas 329, the fungus Cladosporium

Chunk 1057:
raw or treated sewage. Multiple bloodborne pathogens, par
331 has also been implicated.
ticularly viruses, are not stable in the environment for long

Chunk 1058:
Researchers have not demonstrated a measurable risk of
periods 302, and the discharge of limited quantities of blood
adverse health effects among DHCP or patients from expo

Chunk 1059:
and other body fluids into the sanitary sewer is considered a
sure to dental water. Certain studies determined DHCP had
safe method for disposing of these waste materials 6. State

Chunk 1060:
altered nasal flora 332 or substantially greater titers of
and local regulations vary and dictate whether blood or other
Legionella antibodies in comparisons with control populations

Chunk 1061:
body fluids require pretreatment or if they can be discharged
however, no cases of legionellosis were identified among
into the sanitary sewer and in what volume.

Chunk 1062:
exposed DHCP 333,334. Contaminated dental water might
have been the source for localized Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm,
infections in two immunocompromised patients 312.

Chunk 1063:
and Water Quality
Although transient carriage of P. aeruginosa was observed in
Studies have demonstrated that dental unit waterlines i.e., 78 healthy patients treated with contaminated dental treat

Chunk 1064:
narrowbore plastic tubing that carries water to the highspeed ment water, no illness was reported among the group. In this

Chunk 1065:
handpiece, airwater syringe, and ultrasonic scaler can become same study, a retrospective review of dental records also failed

Chunk 1066:
colonized with microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and to identify infections 312.

Chunk 1067:
protozoa 303309. Protected by a polysaccharide slime layer Concentrations of bacterial endotoxin 1,000 endotoxin

Chunk 1068:
known as a glycocalyx, these microorganisms colonize and rep unitsmL from gramnegative water bacteria have been detected

Chunk 1069:
licate on the interior surfaces of the waterline tubing and form in water from colonized dental units 335. No standards exist

Chunk 1070:
a biofilm, which serves as a reservoir that can amplify the num for an acceptable level of endotoxin in drinking water, but the

Chunk 1071:
ber of freefloating i.e., planktonic microorganisms in water maximum level permissible in United States Pharmacopeia

Chunk 1072:
used for dental treatment. Although oral flora 303,310,311 USP sterile water for irrigation is only 0.25 endotoxin units

Chunk 1073:
and human pathogens e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa mL 336. Although the consequences of acute and chronic

Chunk 1074:
303,305,312,313, Legionella species 303,306,313, and exposure to aerosolized endotoxin in dental healthcare set

Chunk 1075:
nontuberculous Mycobacterium species 303,304, have been tings have not been investigated, endotoxin has been associ

Chunk 1076:
isolated from dental water systems, the majority of organisms ated with exacerbation of asthma and onset of hypersensitivity

Chunk 1077:
recovered from dental waterlines are common heterotrophic pneumonitis in other occupational settings 329,337.
water bacteria 305,314,315. These exhibit limited patho
Dental Unit Water Quality

Chunk 1078:
genic potential for immunocompetent persons.
Research has demonstrated that microbial counts can reach
Clinical Implications
200,000 colonyforming units CFUmL within 5 days

Chunk 1079:
Certain reports associate waterborne infections with dental after installation of new dental unit waterlines 305, and lev

Chunk 1080:
water systems, and scientific evidence verifies the potential for els of microbial contamination 106 CFUmL of dental unit

Chunk 1081:
transmission of waterborne infections and disease in hospital water have been documented 309,338. These counts can

Chunk 1082:
settings and in the community 306,312,316. Infection or occur because dental unit waterline factors e.g., system design,

Chunk 1083:
colonization caused by Pseudomonas species or nontuberculous flow rates, and materials promote both bacterial growth and

Chunk 1084:
mycobacteria can occur among susceptible patients through development of biofilm.
direct contact with water 317320 or after exposure to Although no epidemiologic evidence indicates a public health

Chunk 1085:
residual waterborne contamination of inadequately reprocessed problem, the presence of substantial numbers of pathogens in

Chunk 1086:
medical instruments 321323. Nontuberculous mycobac dental unit waterlines generates concern. Exposing patients or

Chunk 1087:
teria can also be transmitted to patients from tap water aero DHCP to water of uncertain microbiological quality, despite
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 29

Chunk 1088:
the lack of documented adverse health effects, is inconsistent the turbine, air, or waterlines. The majority of recently manu

Chunk 1089:
with accepted infectioncontrol principles. Thus in 1995, ADA factured dental units are engineered to prevent retraction of

Chunk 1090:
addressed the dental water concern by asking manufacturers oral fluids, but some older dental units are equipped with

Chunk 1091:
to provide equipment with the ability to deliver treatment water antiretraction valves that require periodic maintenance. Users

Chunk 1092:
with 200 CFUmL of unfiltered output from waterlines 339. should consult the owners manual or contact the manufac

Chunk 1093:
This threshold was based on the quality assurance standard turer to determine whether testing or maintenance of

Chunk 1094:
established for dialysate fluid, to ensure that fluid delivery sys antiretraction valves or other devices is required. Even with

Chunk 1095:
tems in hemodialysis units have not been colonized by indig antiretraction valves, flushing devices for a minimum of 20
enous waterborne organisms 340. 30 seconds after each patient is recommended.

Chunk 1096:
Standards also exist for safe drinking water quality as estab
Maintenance and Monitoring
lished by EPA, the American Public Health Association
of Dental Unit Water

Chunk 1097:
APHA, and the American Water Works Association
AWWA they have set limits for heterotrophic bacteria of DHCP should be trained regarding water quality, biofilm

Chunk 1098:
500 CFUmL of drinking water 341,342. Thus, the num formation, water treatment methods, and appropriate main

Chunk 1099:
ber of bacteria in water used as a coolantirrigant for nonsur tenance protocols for water delivery systems. Water treatment

Chunk 1100:
gical dental procedures should be as low as reasonably and monitoring products require strict adherence to mainte

Chunk 1101:
achievable and, at a minimum, 500 CFUmL, the regulatory nance protocols, and noncompliance with treatment regimens

Chunk 1102:
standard for safe drinking water established by EPA and APHA has been associated with persistence of microbial contamina
AWWA. tion in treated systems 345. Clinical monitoring of water

Chunk 1103:
quality can ensure that procedures are correctly performed and
Strategies To Improve Dental
that devices are working in accordance with the manufacturers
Unit Water Quality

Chunk 1104:
Unit Water Quality
previously validated protocol.
In 1993, CDC recommended that dental waterlines be Dentists should consult with the manufacturer of their dental

Chunk 1105:
flushed at the beginning of the clinic day to reduce the micro unit or water delivery system to determine the best method for

Chunk 1106:
bial load 2. However, studies have demonstrated this prac maintaining acceptable water quality i.e., 500 CFUmL and

Chunk 1107:
tice does not affect biofilm in the waterlines or reliably improve the recommended frequency of monitoring. Monitoring of den

Chunk 1108:
the quality of water used during dental treatment tal water quality can be performed by using commercial self

Chunk 1109:
315,338,343. Because the recommended value of 500 CFU contained test kits or commercial watertesting laboratories.

Chunk 1110:
mL cannot be achieved by using this method, other strategies Because methods used to treat dental water systems target the

Chunk 1111:
should be employed. Dental unit water that remains untreated entire biofilm, no rationale exists for routine testing for such

Chunk 1112:
or unfiltered is unlikely to meet drinking water standards 303 specific organisms as Legionella or Pseudomonas, except when

Chunk 1113:
309. Commercial devices and procedures designed to improve investigating a suspected waterborne disease outbreak 244.
the quality of water used in dental treatment are available 316

Chunk 1114:
Delivery of Sterile Surgical Irrigation
methods demonstrated to be effective include selfcontained

Chunk 1115:
water systems combined with chemical treatment, inline Sterile solutions e.g., sterile saline or sterile water should be

Chunk 1116:
microfilters, and combinations of these treatments. Simply used as a coolantirrigation in the performance of oral surgical

Chunk 1117:
using source water containing 500 CFUmL of bacteria e.g., procedures where a greater opportunity exists for entry of

Chunk 1118:
tap, distilled, or sterile water in a selfcontained water system microorganisms, exogenous and endogenous, into the vascular

Chunk 1119:
will not eliminate bacterial contamination in treatment water system and other normally sterile areas that support the oral

Chunk 1120:
if biofilms in the water system are not controlled. Removal or cavity e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue and increased poten

Chunk 1121:
inactivation of dental waterline biofilms requires use of chemi tial exists for localized or systemic infection see Oral Surgical

Chunk 1122:
cal germicides. Procedures. Conventional dental units cannot reliably deliver
Patient material e.g., oral microorganisms, blood, and saliva sterile water even when equipped with independent water res

Chunk 1123:
can enter the dental water system during patient treatment ervoirs because the waterbearing pathway cannot be reliably

Chunk 1124:
311,344. Dental devices that are connected to the dental sterilized. Delivery devices e.g., bulb syringe or sterile, single

Chunk 1125:
water system and that enter the patients mouth e.g., use disposable products should be used to deliver sterile water

Chunk 1126:
handpieces, ultrasonic scalers, or airwater syringes should be 2,121. Oral surgery and implant handpieces, as well as ultra

Chunk 1127:
operated to discharge water and air for a minimum of 2030 sonic scalers, are commercially available that bypass the dental

Chunk 1128:
seconds after each patient 2. This procedure is intended to unit to deliver sterile water or other solutions by using single

Chunk 1129:
physically flush out patient material that might have entered use disposable or sterilizable tubing 316.
30 MMWR December 19, 2003
BoilWater Advisories Special Considerations

Chunk 1130:
A boilwater advisory is a public health announcement that
Dental Handpieces and Other Devices
the public should boil tap water before drinking it. When
Attached to Air and Waterlines

Chunk 1131:
issued, the public should assume the water is unsafe to drink.
Advisories can be issued after 1 failure of or substantial inter Multiple semicritical dental devices that touch mucous mem

Chunk 1132:
ruption in water treatment processes that result in increased branes are attached to the air or waterlines of the dental unit.

Chunk 1133:
turbidity levels or particle counts and mechanical or equip Among these devices are high and lowspeed handpieces, pro

Chunk 1134:
ment failure 2 positive test results for pathogens e.g., phylaxis angles, ultrasonic and sonic scaling tips, air abrasion

Chunk 1135:
Cryptosporidium, Giardia, or Shigella in water 3 violations devices, and air and water syringe tips. Although no epide

Chunk 1136:
of the total coliform rule or the turbidity standard of the sur miologic evidence implicates these instruments in disease trans

Chunk 1137:
face water treatment rule 4 circumstances that compromise mission 353, studies of highspeed handpieces using dye

Chunk 1138:
the distribution system e.g., watermain break coupled with expulsion have confirmed the potential for retracting oral flu

Chunk 1139:
an indication of a health hazard or 5 a natural disaster e.g., ids into internal compartments of the device 354358. This

Chunk 1140:
flood, hurricane, or earthquake 346. In recent years, determination indicates that retained patient material can be

Chunk 1141:
increased numbers of boilwater advisories have resulted from expelled intraorally during subsequent uses. Studies using labo

Chunk 1142:
contamination of public drinking water systems with water ratory models also indicate the possibility for retention of viral

Chunk 1143:
borne pathogens. Most notable was the outbreak of DNA and viable virus inside both highspeed handpieces and

Chunk 1144:
cryptosporidiosis in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where the prophylaxis angles 356,357,359. The potential for contami

Chunk 1145:
municipal water system was contaminated with the protozoan nation of the internal surfaces of other devices e.g., lowspeed

Chunk 1146:
parasite Cryptosporidium parvum. An estimated 403,000 per handpieces and ultrasonic scalers, has not been studied, but

Chunk 1147:
sons became ill 347,348. restricted physical access limits their cleaning. Accordingly, any

Chunk 1148:
During a boilwater advisory, water should not be delivered dental device connected to the dental airwater system that

Chunk 1149:
to patients through the dental unit, ultrasonic scaler, or other enters the patients mouth should be run to discharge water,

Chunk 1150:
dental equipment that uses the public water system. This air, or a combination for a minimum of 2030 seconds after

Chunk 1151:
restriction does not apply if the water source is isolated from each patient 2. This procedure is intended to help physically

Chunk 1152:
the municipal water system e.g., a separate water reservoir or flush out patient material that might have entered the turbine

Chunk 1153:
other water treatment device cleared for marketing by FDA. and air and waterlines 2,356,357.

Chunk 1154:
Patients should rinse with bottled or distilled water until the Heat methods can sterilize dental handpieces and other in

Chunk 1155:
boilwater advisory has been cancelled. During these advisory traoral devices attached to air or waterlines 246,275,356,

Chunk 1156:
periods, tap water should not be used to dilute germicides or 357,360. For processing any dental device that can be

Chunk 1157:
for hand hygiene unless the water has been brought to a roll removed from the dental unit air or waterlines, neither surface

Chunk 1158:
ing boil for 1 minute and cooled before use 346,349351. disinfection nor immersion in chemical germicides is an

Chunk 1159:
For hand hygiene, antimicrobial products that do not require acceptable method. Ethylene oxide gas cannot adequately ster

Chunk 1160:
water e.g., alcoholbased hand rubs can be used until the ilize internal components of handpieces 250,275. In clinical

Chunk 1161:
boilwater notice is cancelled. If hands are visibly contami evaluations of highspeed handpieces, cleaning and lubrica

Chunk 1162:
nated, bottled water and soap should be used for handwashing tion were the most critical factors in determining performance

Chunk 1163:
if bottled water is not immediately available, an antiseptic and durability 361363. Manufacturers instructions for

Chunk 1164:
towelette should be used 13,122. cleaning, lubrication, and sterilization should be followed

Chunk 1165:
When the advisory is cancelled, the local water utility should closely to ensure both the effectiveness of the process and the

Chunk 1166:
provide guidance for flushing of waterlines to reduce residual longevity of handpieces.
microbial contamination. All incoming waterlines from the Some components of dental instruments are permanently

Chunk 1167:
public water system inside the dental office e.g., faucets, water attached to dental unit waterlines and although they do not

Chunk 1168:
lines, and dental equipment should be flushed. No consensus enter the patients oral cavity, they are likely to become con

Chunk 1169:
exists regarding the optimal duration for flushing procedures taminated with oral fluids during treatment procedures. Such

Chunk 1170:
after cancellation of the advisory recommendations range from components e.g., handles or dental unit attachments of saliva

Chunk 1171:
1 to 5 minutes 244,346,351,352. The length of time needed ejectors, highspeed air evacuators, and airwater syringes

Chunk 1172:
can vary with the type and length of the plumbing system lead should be covered with impervious barriers that are changed

Chunk 1173:
ing to the office. After the incoming public water system lines after each use. If the item becomes visibly contaminated dur

Chunk 1174:
are flushed, dental unit waterlines should be disinfected accord ing use, DHCP should clean and disinfect with an EPA
ing to the manufacturers instructions 346.

Chunk 1175:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 31
registered hospital disinfectant intermediatelevel before use become contaminated should be cleaned and disinfected with

Chunk 1176:
on the next patient. an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant of low i.e., HIV and
HBV claim to intermediatelevel i.e., tuberculocidal claim

Chunk 1177:
Saliva Ejectors activity. Radiography equipment e.g., radiograph tubehead
and control panel should be protected with surface barriers
Backflow from lowvolume saliva ejectors occurs when the

Chunk 1178:
that are changed after each patient. If barriers are not used,
pressure in the patients mouth is less than that in the evacua
equipment that has come into contact with DHCPs gloved

Chunk 1179:
tor. Studies have reported that backflow in lowvolume suc
hands or contaminated film packets should be cleaned and
tion lines can occur and microorganisms be present in the lines

Chunk 1180:
then disinfected after each patient use.
retracted into the patients mouth when a seal around the
Digital radiography sensors and other hightechnology

Chunk 1181:
saliva ejector is created e.g., by a patient closing lips around
instruments e.g., intraoral camera, electronic periodontal
the tip of the ejector, creating a partial vacuum 364366.

Chunk 1182:
probe, occlusal analyzers, and lasers come into contact with
This backflow can be a potential source of crosscontamina
mucous membranes and are considered semicritical devices.

Chunk 1183:
tion occurrence is variable because the quality of the seal
They should be cleaned and ideally heatsterilized or high
formed varies between patients. Furthermore, studies have dem

Chunk 1184:
level disinfected between patients. However, these items vary
onstrated that gravity pulls fluid back toward the patients
by manufacturer or type of device in their ability to be steril

Chunk 1185:
mouth whenever a length of the suction tubing holding the
ized or highlevel disinfected. Semicritical items that cannot
tip is positioned above the patients mouth, or during simulta

Chunk 1186:
be reprocessed by heat sterilization or highlevel disinfection
neous use of other evacuation highvolume equipment 364
should, at a minimum, be barrier protected by using an FDA

Chunk 1187:
366. Although no adverse health effects associated with the
cleared barrier to reduce gross contamination during use. Use
saliva ejector have been reported, practitioners should be aware

Chunk 1188:
of a barrier does not always protect from contamination 369
that in certain situations, backflow could occur when using a
374. One study determined that a brand of commercially
saliva ejector.

Chunk 1189:
saliva ejector.
available plastic barriers used to protect dental digital radiog
raphy sensors failed at a substantial rate 44. This rate
Dental Radiology

Chunk 1190:
Dental Radiology
dropped to 6 when latex finger cots were used in conjunc
When taking radiographs, the potential to crosscontami tion with the plastic barrier 375. To minimize the potential

Chunk 1191:
nate equipment and environmental surfaces with blood or for deviceassociated infections, after removing the barrier, the

Chunk 1192:
saliva is high if aseptic technique is not practiced. Gloves should device should be cleaned and disinfected with an EPA

Chunk 1193:
be worn when taking radiographs and handling contaminated registered hospital disinfectant intermediatelevel after each

Chunk 1194:
film packets. Other PPE e.g., mask, protective eyewear, and patient. Manufacturers should be consulted regarding appro

Chunk 1195:
gowns should be used if spattering of blood or other body priate barrier and disinfectionsterilization procedures for digi

Chunk 1196:
fluids is likely 11,13,367. Heattolerant versions of intraoral tal radiography sensors, other hightechnology intraoral devices,

Chunk 1197:
radiograph accessories are available and these semicritical items and computer components.
e.g., filmholding and positioning devices should be heat

Chunk 1198:
sterilized before patient use. Aseptic Technique for Parenteral
After exposure of the radiograph and before glove removal, Medications
the film should be dried with disposable gauze or a paper towel

Chunk 1199:
Safe handling of parenteral medications and fluid infusion
to remove blood or excess saliva and placed in a container e.g.,
systems is required to prevent healthcareassociated infections

Chunk 1200:
disposable cup for transport to the developing area. Alterna
among patients undergoing conscious sedation. Parenteral
tively, if FDAcleared film barrier pouches are used, the film

Chunk 1201:
medications can be packaged in singledose ampules, vials or
packets should be carefully removed from the pouch to avoid
prefilled syringes, usually without bacteriostaticpreservative

Chunk 1202:
contamination of the outside film packet and placed in the
agents, and intended for use on a single patient. Multidose
clean container for transport to the developing area.

Chunk 1203:
vials, used for more than one patient, can have a preservative,
Various methods have been recommended for aseptic trans
but both types of containers of medication should be handled

Chunk 1204:
port of exposed films to the developing area, and for removing
with aseptic techniques to prevent contamination.
the outer film packet before exposing and developing the film.

Chunk 1205:
Singledose vials should be used for parenteral medications
Other information regarding dental radiography infection
whenever possible 376,377. Singledose vials might pose a

Chunk 1206:
control is available 260,367,368. However, care should be
risk for contamination if they are punctured repeatedly. The
taken to avoid contamination of the developing equipment.

Chunk 1207:
leftover contents of a singledose vial should be discarded and
Protective barriers should be used, or any surfaces that
32 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1208:
never combined with medications for use on another patient Preprocedural Mouth Rinses
376,377. Medication from a singledose syringe should not

Chunk 1209:
Antimicrobial mouth rinses used by patients before a dental
be administered to multiple patients, even if the needle on the
procedure are intended to reduce the number of microorgan

Chunk 1210:
syringe is changed 378.
isms the patient might release in the form of aerosols or spat
The overall risk for extrinsic contamination of multidose

Chunk 1211:
ter that subsequently can contaminate DHCP and equipment
vials is probably minimal, although the consequences of con
operatory surfaces. In addition, preprocedural rinsing can

Chunk 1212:
tamination might result in lifethreatening infection 379. If
decrease the number of microorganisms introduced in the
necessary to use a multidose vial, its access diaphragm should

Chunk 1213:
patients bloodstream during invasive dental procedures
be cleansed with 70 alcohol before inserting a sterile device
389,390.
into the vial 380,381. A multidose vial should be discarded

Chunk 1214:
No scientific evidence indicates that preprocedural mouth
if sterility is compromised 380,381.
rinsing prevents clinical infections among DHCP or patients,

Chunk 1215:
Medication vials, syringes, or supplies should not be carried
but studies have demonstrated that a preprocedural rinse with
in uniform or clothing pockets. If trays are used to deliver

Chunk 1216:
an antimicrobial product e.g., chlorhexidine gluconate,
medications to individual patients, they should be cleaned
essential oils, or povidoneiodine can reduce the level of oral

Chunk 1217:
between patients. To further reduce the chance of contamina
microorganisms in aerosols and spatter generated during rou
tion, all medication vials should be restricted to a centralized

Chunk 1218:
tine dental procedures with rotary instruments e.g., dental
medication preparation area separate from the treatment area
handpieces or ultrasonic scalers 391399. Preprocedural
382.

Chunk 1219:
382.
mouth rinses can be most beneficial before a procedure that
All fluid infusion and administration sets e.g., IV bags, tub
requires using a prophylaxis cup or ultrasonic scaler because

Chunk 1220:
ing, and connections are singlepatient use because sterility
rubber dams cannot be used to minimize aerosol and spatter
cannot be guaranteed when an infusion or administration set

Chunk 1221:
generation and, unless the provider has an assistant, high
is used on multiple patients. Aseptic technique should be used
volume evacuation is not commonly used 173.

Chunk 1222:
when preparing IV infusion and administration sets, and
The science is unclear concerning the incidence and nature
entry into or breaks in the tubing should be minimized 378.

Chunk 1223:
of bacteremias from oral procedures, the relationship of these
bacteremias to disease, and the preventive benefit of antimi
SingleUse or Disposable Devices

Chunk 1224:
crobial rinses. In limited studies, no substantial benefit has
A singleuse device, also called a disposable device, is been demonstrated for mouth rinsing in terms of reducing

Chunk 1225:
designed to be used on one patient and then discarded, not oral microorganisms in dentalinduced bacteremias 400,401.

Chunk 1226:
reprocessed for use on another patient e.g., cleaned, disin However, the American Heart Associations recommendations

Chunk 1227:
fected, or sterilized 383. Singleuse devices in dentistry are regarding preventing bacterial endocarditis during dental pro

Chunk 1228:
usually not heattolerant and cannot be reliably cleaned. cedures 402 provide limited support concerning

Chunk 1229:
Examples include syringe needles, prophylaxis cups and preprocedural mouth rinsing with an antimicrobial as an

Chunk 1230:
brushes, and plastic orthodontic brackets. Certain items e.g., adjunct for patients at risk for bacterial endocarditis. Insuffi

Chunk 1231:
prophylaxis angles, saliva ejectors, highvolume evacuator tips, cient data exist to recommend preprocedural mouth rinses to

Chunk 1232:
and airwater syringe tips are commonly available in a dispos prevent clinical infections among patients or DHCP.
able form and should be disposed of appropriately after each

Chunk 1233:
use. Singleuse devices and items e.g., cotton rolls, gauze, and Oral Surgical Procedures
irrigating syringes for use during oral surgical procedures

Chunk 1234:
The oral cavity is colonized with numerous microorganisms.
should be sterile at the time of use.
Oral surgical procedures present an opportunity for entry of

Chunk 1235:
Because of the physical construction of certain devices e.g.,
microorganisms i.e., exogenous and endogenous into the
burs, endodontic files, and broaches cleaning can be difficult.

Chunk 1236:
vascular system and other normally sterile areas of the oral
In addition, deterioration can occur on the cutting surfaces of
cavity e.g., bone or subcutaneous tissue therefore, an

Chunk 1237:
some carbidediamond burs and endodontic files during pro
increased potential exists for localized or systemic infection.
cessing 384 and after repeated processing cycles, leading to

Chunk 1238:
Oral surgical procedures involve the incision, excision, or
potential breakage during patient treatment 385388. These
reflection of tissue that exposes the normally sterile areas of

Chunk 1239:
factors, coupled with the knowledge that burs and endodon
the oral cavity. Examples include biopsy, periodontal surgery,
tic instruments exhibit signs of wear during normal use, might

Chunk 1240:
apical surgery, implant surgery, and surgical extractions of teeth
make it practical to consider them as singleuse devices.
e.g., removal of erupted or nonerupted tooth requiring eleva

Chunk 1241:
tion of mucoperiosteal flap, removal of bone or section of tooth,
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 33

Chunk 1242:
and suturing if needed see Hand Hygiene, PPE, Single Use but because preclinical educational exercises simulate clinical

Chunk 1243:
or Disposable Devices, and Dental Unit Water Quality. experiences, students enrolled in dental programs should still
follow standard precautions. Autoclaving teeth for preclinical

Chunk 1244:
Handling of Biopsy Specimens laboratory exercises does not appear to alter their physical prop
erties sufficiently to compromise the learning experience

Chunk 1245:
To protect persons handling and transporting biopsy speci
405,406. However, whether autoclave sterilization of
mens, each specimen must be placed in a sturdy, leakproof

Chunk 1246:
extracted teeth affects dentinal structure to the point that the
container with a secure lid for transportation 13. Care should
chemical and microchemical relationship between dental

Chunk 1247:
be taken when collecting the specimen to avoid contaminat
materials and the dentin would be affected for research pur
ing the outside of the container. If the outside of the container

Chunk 1248:
poses on dental materials is unknown 406.
becomes visibly contaminated, it should be cleaned and disin
Use of teeth that do not contain amalgam is preferred in

Chunk 1249:
fected or placed in an impervious bag 2,13. The container
educational settings because they can be safely autoclaved
must be labeled with the biohazard symbol during storage,

Chunk 1250:
403,405. Extracted teeth containing amalgam restorations
transport, shipment, and disposal 13,14.
should not be heatsterilized because of the potential health

Chunk 1251:
hazard from mercury vaporization and exposure. If extracted
Handling of Extracted Teeth
teeth containing amalgam restorations are to be used, immer

Chunk 1252:
sion in 10 formalin solution for 2 weeks should be effective
Disposal
in disinfecting both the internal and external structures of the
Extracted teeth that are being discarded are subject to the

Chunk 1253:
teeth 403. If using formalin, manufacturer MSDS should be
containerization and labeling provisions outlined by OSHAs
reviewed for occupational safety and health concerns and to

Chunk 1254:
bloodborne pathogens standard 13. OSHA considers
ensure compliance with OSHA regulations 15.
extracted teeth to be potentially infectious material that should

Chunk 1255:
be disposed in medical waste containers. Extracted teeth sent
Dental Laboratory
to a dental laboratory for shade or size comparisons should be

Chunk 1256:
cleaned, surfacedisinfected with an EPAregistered hospital Dental prostheses, appliances, and items used in their fabri

Chunk 1257:
disinfectant with intermediatelevel activity i.e., tuberculocidal cation e.g., impressions, occlusal rims, and bite registrations

Chunk 1258:
claim, and transported in a manner consistent with OSHA are potential sources for crosscontamination and should be

Chunk 1259:
regulations. However, extracted teeth can be returned to handled in a manner that prevents exposure of DHCP, patients,

Chunk 1260:
patients on request, at which time provisions of the standard or the office environment to infectious agents. Effective com

Chunk 1261:
no longer apply 14. Extracted teeth containing dental amal munication and coordination between the laboratory and den

Chunk 1262:
gam should not be placed in a medical waste container that tal practice will ensure that appropriate cleaning and

Chunk 1263:
uses incineration for final disposal. Commercial metal disinfection procedures are performed in the dental office or

Chunk 1264:
recycling companies also might accept extracted teeth with laboratory, materials are not damaged or distorted because of

Chunk 1265:
metal restorations, including amalgam. State and local regula disinfectant overexposure, and effective disinfection procedures

Chunk 1266:
tions should be consulted regarding disposal of the amalgam. are not unnecessarily duplicated 407,408.
When a laboratory case is sent offsite, DHCP should pro
Educational Settings

Chunk 1267:
vide written information regarding the methods e.g., type of
Extracted teeth are occasionally collected for use in preclini disinfectant and exposure time used to clean and disinfect

Chunk 1268:
cal educational training. These teeth should be cleaned of vis the material e.g., impression, stone model, or appliance

Chunk 1269:
ible blood and gross debris and maintained in a hydrated state 2,407,409. Clinical materials that are not decontaminated

Chunk 1270:
in a wellconstructed closed container during transport. The are subject to OSHA and U.S. Department of Transportation

Chunk 1271:
container should be labeled with the biohazard symbol 13,14. regulations regarding transportation and shipping of infectious

Chunk 1272:
Because these teeth will be autoclaved before clinical exercises materials 13,410.

Chunk 1273:
or study, use of the most economical storage solution e.g., Appliances and prostheses delivered to the patient should

Chunk 1274:
water or saline might be practical. Liquid chemical germi be free of contamination. Communication between the labo

Chunk 1275:
cides can also be used but do not reliably disinfect both exter ratory and the dental practice is also key at this stage to deter

Chunk 1276:
nal surface and interior pulp tissue 403,404. mine which one is responsible for the final disinfection process.

Chunk 1277:
Before being used in an educational setting, the teeth should If the dental laboratory staff provides the disinfection, an EPA

Chunk 1278:
be heatsterilized to allow safe handling. Microbial growth can registered hospital disinfectant low to intermediate should

Chunk 1279:
be eliminated by using an autoclave cycle for 40 minutes 405, be used, written documentation of the disinfection method
34 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1280:
provided, and the item placed in a tamperevident container pans, or lathes should be cleaned and disinfected between

Chunk 1281:
before returning it to the dental office. If such documentation patients and according to the manufacturers instructions. Pres

Chunk 1282:
is not provided, the dental office is responsible for final disin sure pots and water baths are particularly susceptible to con

Chunk 1283:
fection procedures. tamination with microorganisms and should be cleaned and
Dental prostheses or impressions brought into the labora disinfected between patients 422. In the majority of instances,

Chunk 1284:
tory can be contaminated with bacteria, viruses, and fungi these items can be cleaned and disinfected with an EPA

Chunk 1285:
411,412. Dental prostheses, impressions, orthodontic registered hospital disinfectant. Environmental surfaces should

Chunk 1286:
appliances, and other prosthodontic materials e.g., occlusal be barrierprotected or cleaned and disinfected in the same man

Chunk 1287:
rims, temporary prostheses, bite registrations, or extracted ner as in the dental treatment area.

Chunk 1288:
teeth should be thoroughly cleaned i.e., blood and bioburden Unless waste generated in the dental laboratory e.g., dis

Chunk 1289:
removed, disinfected with an EPAregistered hospital disin posable trays or impression materials falls under the category

Chunk 1290:
fectant with a tuberculocidal claim, and thoroughly rinsed of regulated medical waste, it can be discarded with general

Chunk 1291:
before being handled in the inoffice laboratory or sent to an waste. Personnel should dispose of sharp items e.g., burs, dis

Chunk 1292:
offsite laboratory 2,244,249,407. The best time to clean posable blades, and orthodontic wires in punctureresistant
and disinfect impressions, prostheses, or appliances is as soon containers.

Chunk 1293:
as possible after removal from the patients mouth before dry
ing of blood or other bioburden can occur. Specific guidance LaserElectrosurgery Plumes

Chunk 1294:
regarding cleaning and disinfecting techniques for various or Surgical Smoke
materials is available 260,413416. DHCP are advised to
During surgical procedures that use a laser or electrosurgical

Chunk 1295:
consult with manufacturers regarding the stability of specific
unit, the thermal destruction of tissue creates a smoke
materials during disinfection.

Chunk 1296:
byproduct. Laser plumes or surgical smoke represent another
In the laboratory, a separate receiving and disinfecting area
potential risk for DHCP 423425. Lasers transfer electro

Chunk 1297:
should be established to reduce contamination in the produc
magnetic energy into tissues, resulting in the release of a heated
tion area. Bringing untreated items into the laboratory increases

Chunk 1298:
plume that includes particles, gases e.g., hydrogen cyanide,
chances for cross infection 260. If no communication has
benzene, and formaldehyde, tissue debris, viruses, and offen

Chunk 1299:
been received regarding prior cleaning and disinfection of a
sive odors. One concern is that aerosolized infectious material
material, the dental laboratory staff should perform cleaning

Chunk 1300:
in the laser plume might reach the nasal mucosa of the laser
and disinfection procedures before handling. If during
operator and adjacent DHCP. Although certain viruses e.g.,

Chunk 1301:
manipulation of a material or appliance a previously undetec
varicellazoster virus and herpes simplex virus appear not to
ted area of blood or bioburden becomes apparent, cleaning

Chunk 1302:
aerosolize efficiently 426,427, other viruses and various bac
and disinfection procedures should be repeated. Transfer of
teria e.g., human papilloma virus, HIV, coagulasenegative

Chunk 1303:
oral microorganisms into and onto impressions has been docu
Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium species, and Neisseria species
mented 417419. Movement of these organisms onto den

Chunk 1304:
have been detected in laser plumes 428434. However, the
tal casts has also been demonstrated 420. Certain microbes
presence of an infectious agent in a laser plume might not be

Chunk 1305:
have been demonstrated to remain viable within gypsum cast
sufficient to cause disease from airborne exposure, especially if
materials for 7 days 421. Incorrect handling of contami

Chunk 1306:
the agents normal mode of transmission is not airborne. No
nated impressions, prostheses, or appliances, therefore, offers
evidence indicates that HIV or HBV have been transmitted

Chunk 1307:
an opportunity for transmission of microorganisms 260.
through aerosolization and inhalation 435. Although con
Whether in the office or laboratory, PPE should be worn until

Chunk 1308:
tinuing studies are needed to evaluate the risk for DHCP of
disinfection is completed 1,2,7,10,13.
laser plumes and electrosurgery smoke, following NIOSH rec

Chunk 1309:
If laboratory items e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, or
ommendations 425 and practices developed by the Associa
laboratory knives are used on contaminated or potentially con

Chunk 1310:
tion of periOperative Registered Nurses AORN might be
taminated appliances, prostheses, or other material, they should
practical 436. These practices include using 1 standard pre

Chunk 1311:
be heatsterilized, disinfected between patients, or discarded i.e.,
cautions e.g., highfiltration surgical masks and possibly full
disposable items should be used 260,407. Heattolerant items

Chunk 1312:
face shields 437 2 central room suction units with inline
used in the mouth e.g., metal impression tray or face bow fork
filters to collect particulate matter from minimal plumes and

Chunk 1313:
should be heatsterilized before being used on another patient
3 dedicated mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high
2,407. Items that do not normally contact the patient, pros

Chunk 1314:
efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts of laser plume
thetic device, or appliance but frequently become contaminated
particles. Local smoke evacuation systems have been recom

Chunk 1315:
and cannot withstand heatsterilization e.g., articulators, case
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 35

Chunk 1316:
mended by consensus organizations, and these systems can mendations for expanded precautions to prevent transmission

Chunk 1317:
improve the quality of the operating field. Employers should of M. tuberculosis and other organisms that can be spread by

Chunk 1318:
be aware of this emerging problem and advise employees of airborne, droplet, or contact routes have been detailed in other

Chunk 1319:
the potential hazards of laser smoke 438. However, this con guidelines 5,11,20.
cern remains unresolved in dental practice and no recommen TB transmission is controlled through a hierarchy of mea

Chunk 1320:
dation is provided here. sures, including administrative controls, environmental con
trols, and personal respiratory protection. The main

Chunk 1321:
M. tuberculosis administrative goals of a TB infectioncontrol program are early
detection of a person with active TB disease and prompt isola
Patients infected with M. tuberculosis occasionally seek

Chunk 1322:
tion from susceptible persons to reduce the risk of transmis
urgent dental treatment at outpatient dental settings. Under
sion. Although DHCP are not responsible for diagnosis and

Chunk 1323:
standing the pathogenesis of the development of TB will help
treatment of TB, they should be trained to recognize signs and
DHCP determine how to manage such patients.

Chunk 1324:
symptoms to help with prompt detection. Because potential
M. tuberculosis is a bacterium carried in airborne infective
for transmission of M. tuberculosis exists in outpatient settings,

Chunk 1325:
droplet nuclei that can be generated when persons with pul
dental practices should develop a TB control program appro
monary or laryngeal TB sneeze, cough, speak, or sing 439.

Chunk 1326:
priate for their level of risk 20,21.
These small particles 15 µm can stay suspended in the air
cid127 A community risk assessment should be conducted peri

Chunk 1327:
for hours 440. Infection occurs when a susceptible person
odically, and TB infectioncontrol policies for each dental
inhales droplet nuclei containing M. tuberculosis, which then

Chunk 1328:
setting should be based on the risk assessment. The poli
travel to the alveoli of the lungs. Usually within 212 weeks
cies should include provisions for detection and referral

Chunk 1329:
after initial infection with M. tuberculosis, immune response
of patients who might have undiagnosed active TB man
prevents further spread of the TB bacteria, although they can

Chunk 1330:
agement of patients with active TB who require urgent
remain alive in the lungs for years, a condition termed latent
dental care and DHCP education, counseling, and TST

Chunk 1331:
TB infection. Persons with latent TB infection usually exhibit
screening.
a reactive tuberculin skin test TST, have no symptoms of
cid127 DHCP who have contact with patients should have a

Chunk 1332:
active disease, and are not infectious. However, they can
baseline TST, preferably by using a twostep test at the
develop active disease later in life if they do not receive treat

Chunk 1333:
beginning of employment. The facilitys level of TB risk
ment for their latent infection.
will determine the need for routine followup TST.
Approximately 5 of persons who have been recently

Chunk 1334:
cid127 While taking patients initial medical histories and at
infected and not treated for latent TB infection will progress
periodic updates, dental DHCP should routinely ask all

Chunk 1335:
from infection to active disease during the first 12 years after
patients whether they have a history of TB disease or symp
infection another 5 will develop active disease later in life.

Chunk 1336:
toms indicative of TB.
Thus, approximately 90 of U.S. persons with latent TB
cid127 Patients with a medical history or symptoms indicative of

Chunk 1337:
infection do not progress to active TB disease. Although both
undiagnosed active TB should be referred promptly for
latent TB infection and active TB disease are described as TB,

Chunk 1338:
medical evaluation to determine possible infectiousness.
only the person with active disease is contagious and presents
Such patients should not remain in the dentalcare facil

Chunk 1339:
a risk of transmission. Symptoms of active TB disease include
ity any longer than required to evaluate their dental con
a productive cough, night sweats, fatigue, malaise, fever, and

Chunk 1340:
dition and arrange a referral. While in the dental
unexplained weight loss. Certain immunocompromising medi
healthcare facility, the patient should be isolated from

Chunk 1341:
cal conditions e.g., HIV increase the risk that TB infection
other patients and DHCP, wear a surgical mask when not
will progress to active disease at a faster rate 441.

Chunk 1342:
being evaluated, or be instructed to cover their mouth and
Overall, the risk borne by DHCP for exposure to a patient
nose when coughing or sneezing.

Chunk 1343:
with active TB disease is probably low 20,21. Only one report
cid127 Elective dental treatment should be deferred until a phy
exists of TB transmission in a dental office 442, and TST con

Chunk 1344:
sician confirms that a patient does not have infectious TB,
versions among DHCP are also low 443,444. However, in
or if the patient is diagnosed with active TB disease, until

Chunk 1345:
certain cases, DHCP or the community served by the dental
confirmed the patient is no longer infectious.
facility might be at relatively high risk for exposure to TB.

Chunk 1346:
cid127 If urgent dental care is provided for a patient who has, or
Surgical masks do not prevent inhalation of M. tuberculosis
is suspected of having active TB disease, the care should

Chunk 1347:
droplet nuclei, and therefore, standard precautions are not
be provided in a facility e.g., hospital that provides air
sufficient to prevent transmission of this organism. Recom

Chunk 1348:
borne infection isolation i.e., using such engineering con
36 MMWR December 19, 2003
trols as TB isolation rooms, negatively pressured relative immigrant from the United Kingdom 453. Compared with

Chunk 1349:
to the corridors, with air either exhausted to the outside CJD patients, those with vCJD are younger 28 years versus

Chunk 1350:
or HEPAfiltered if recirculation is necessary. Standard 68 years median age at death, and have a longer duration of

Chunk 1351:
surgical face masks do not protect against TB transmis illness 13 months versus 4.5 months. Also, vCJD patients

Chunk 1352:
sion DHCP should use respiratory protection e.g., fit characteristically exhibit sensory and psychiatric symptoms that

Chunk 1353:
tested, disposable N95 respirators. are uncommon with CJD. Another difference includes the ease

Chunk 1354:
cid127 Settings that do not require use of respiratory protection with which the presence of prions is consistently demonstrated

Chunk 1355:
because they do not treat active TB patients and do not in lymphoreticular tissues e.g., tonsil in vCJD patients by
perform coughinducing procedures on potential active immunohistochemistry 454.

Chunk 1356:
TB patients do not need to develop a written respiratory CJD and vCJD are transmissible diseases, but not through
protection program. the air or casual contact. All known cases of iatrogenic CJD

Chunk 1357:
cid127 Any DHCP with a persistent cough i.e., lasting 3 weeks, have resulted from exposure to infected central nervous tissue

Chunk 1358:
especially in the presence of other signs or symptoms com e.g., brain and dura mater, pituitary, or eye tissue. Studies in

Chunk 1359:
patible with active TB e.g., weight loss, night sweats, experimental animals have determined that other tissues have

Chunk 1360:
fatigue, bloody sputum, anorexia, or fever, should be low or no detectable infectivity 243,455,456. Limited

Chunk 1361:
evaluated promptly. The DHCP should not return to the experimental studies have demonstrated that scrapie a TSE in

Chunk 1362:
workplace until a diagnosis of TB has been excluded or sheep can be transmitted to healthy hamsters and mice by

Chunk 1363:
the DHCP is on therapy and a physician has determined exposing oral tissues to infectious homogenate 457,458.
that the DHCP is noninfectious. These animal models and experimental designs might not be

Chunk 1364:
directly applicable to human transmission and clinical den
CreutzfeldtJakob Disease and Other tistry, but they indicate a theoretical risk of transmitting prion

Chunk 1365:
Prion Diseases diseases through perioral exposures.
According to published reports, iatrogenic transmission of
CreutzfeldtJakob disease CJD belongs to a group of rap

Chunk 1366:
CJD has occurred in humans under three circumstances after
idly progressive, invariably fatal, degenerative neurological dis
use of contaminated electroencephalography depth electrodes

Chunk 1367:
orders, transmissible spongiform encephalopathies TSEs that
and neurosurgical equipment 459 after use of extracted
affect both humans and animals and are thought to be caused

Chunk 1368:
pituitary hormones 460,461 and after implant of contami
by infection with an unusual pathogen called a prion. Prions
nated corneal 462 and dura mater grafts 463,464 from

Chunk 1369:
are isoforms of a normal protein, capable of selfpropagation
humans. The equipmentrelated cases occurred before the rou
although they lack nucleic acid. Prion diseases have an incu

Chunk 1370:
tine implementation of sterilization procedures used in health
bation period of years and are usually fatal within 1 year of
care facilities.
diagnosis.

Chunk 1371:
diagnosis.
Casecontrol studies have found no evidence that dental
Among humans, TSEs include CJD, GerstmannStraussler
procedures increase the risk of iatrogenic transmission of TSEs

Chunk 1372:
Scheinker syndrome, fatal familial insomnia, kuru, and vari
among humans. In these studies, CJD transmission was not
ant CJD vCJD. Occurring in sporadic, familial, and acquired

Chunk 1373:
associated with dental procedures e.g., root canals or extrac
i.e., iatrogenic forms, CJD has an annual incidence in the
tions, with convincing evidence of prion detection in human

Chunk 1374:
United States and other countries of approximately 1 case
blood, saliva, or oral tissues, or with DHCP becoming occu
million population 445448. In approximately 85 of

Chunk 1375:
pationally infected with CJD 465467. In 2000, prions were
affected patients, CJD occurs as a sporadic disease with no
not found in the dental pulps of eight patients with

Chunk 1376:
recognizable pattern of transmission. A smaller proportion of
neuropathologically confirmed sporadic CJD by using elec
patients 515 experience familial CJD because of inher

Chunk 1377:
trophoresis and a Western blot technique 468.
ited mutations of the prion protein gene 448.
Prions exhibit unusual resistance to conventional chemical

Chunk 1378:
vCJD is distinguishable clinically and neuropathologically
and physical decontamination procedures. Considering this
from classic CJD, and strong epidemiologic and laboratory

Chunk 1379:
resistance and the invariably fatal outcome of CJD, procedures
evidence indicates a causal relationship with bovine spongiform
for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments potentially con

Chunk 1380:
encephalopathy BSE, a progressive neurological disorder of
taminated with the CJD prion have been controversial for years.
cattle commonly known as mad cow disease 449451. vCJD,

Chunk 1381:
Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of sporadic CJD trans
was reported first in the United Kingdom in 1996 449 and
mission during dental and oral surgical procedures is low to

Chunk 1382:
subsequently in other European countries 452. Only one
nil. Until additional information exists regarding the trans
case of vCJD has been reported in the United States, in an

Chunk 1383:
missibility of CJD or vCJD, special precautions in addition to
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 37

Chunk 1384:
standard precautions might be indicated when treating known careassociated infections among patients and occupational

Chunk 1385:
CJD or vCJD patients the following list of precautions is pro exposures among DHCP. Medical errors are caused by faulty

Chunk 1386:
vided for consideration without recommendation systems, processes, and conditions that lead persons to make
243,249,277,469 mistakes or fail to prevent errors being made by others 470.

Chunk 1387:
cid127 Use singleuse disposable items and equipment whenever Effective program evaluation is a systematic way to ensure pro

Chunk 1388:
possible. cedures are useful, feasible, ethical, and accurate. Program evalu

Chunk 1389:
cid127 Consider items difficult to clean e.g., endodontic files, ation is an essential organizational practice however, such

Chunk 1390:
broaches, and carbide and diamond burs as singleuse evaluation is not practiced consistently across program areas,

Chunk 1391:
disposables and discard after one use. nor is it sufficiently wellintegrated into the daytoday man

Chunk 1392:
cid127 To minimize drying of tissues and body fluids on a device, agement of the majority of programs 471.

Chunk 1393:
keep the instrument moist until cleaned and decontaminated. A successful infectioncontrol program depends on develop

Chunk 1394:
cid127 Clean instruments thoroughly and steamautoclave at 134ºC ing standard operating procedures, evaluating practices, routinely

Chunk 1395:
for 18 minutes. This is the least stringent of sterilization documenting adverse outcomes e.g., occupational exposures

Chunk 1396:
methods offered by the World Health Organization. The to blood and workrelated illnesses in DHCP, and monitoring

Chunk 1397:
complete list 469 is available at httpwww.who.intemc healthcareassociated infections in patients. Strategies and tools

Chunk 1398:
documentstsewhocdscsraph2003c.html. to evaluate the infectioncontrol program can include periodic

Chunk 1399:
cid127 Do not use flash sterilization for processing instruments observational assessments, checklists to document procedures,
or devices. and routine review of occupational exposures to bloodborne

Chunk 1400:
Potential infectivity of oral tissues in CJD or vCJD patients is pathogens. Evaluation offers an opportunity to improve the

Chunk 1401:
an unresolved concern. CDC maintains an active surveillance effectiveness of both the infectioncontrol program and dental

Chunk 1402:
program on CJD. Additional information and resources are practice protocols. If deficiencies or problems in the implemen

Chunk 1403:
available at httpwww.cdc.govncidoddiseasescjdcjd.htm. tation of infectioncontrol procedures are identified, further
evaluation is needed to eliminate the problems. Examples of

Chunk 1404:
Program Evaluation infectioncontrol program evaluation activities are provided
Table 5.
The goal of a dental infectioncontrol program is to provide

Chunk 1405:
a safe working environment that will reduce the risk of health
TABLE 5. Examples of methods for evaluating infectioncontrol programs
Program element Evaluation activity

Chunk 1406:
Appropriate immunization of dental healthcare personnel DHCP. Conduct annual review of personnel records to ensure uptodate immunizations.

Chunk 1407:
Assessment of occupational exposures to infectious agents. Report occupational exposures to infectious agents. Document the steps that

Chunk 1408:
occurred around the exposure and plan how such exposure can be prevented in
the future.

Chunk 1409:
the future.
Comprehensive postexposure management plan and medical followup program Ensure the postexposure management plan is clear, complete, and available at all

Chunk 1410:
after occupational exposures to infectious agents. times to all DHCP. All staff should understand the plan, which should include toll
free phone numbers for access to additional information.

Chunk 1411:
Adherence to hand hygiene before and after patient care. Observe and document circumstances of appropriate or inappropriate
handwashing. Review findings in a staff meeting.

Chunk 1412:
Proper use of personal protective equipment to prevent occupational exposures to Observe and document the use of barrier precautions and careful handling of

Chunk 1413:
infectious agents. sharps. Review findings in a staff meeting.

Chunk 1414:
Routine and appropriate sterilization of instruments using a biologic monitoring Monitor paper log of steam cycle and temperature strip with each sterilization load,

Chunk 1415:
system. and examine results of weekly biologic monitoring. Take appropriate action when
failure of sterilization process is noted.

Chunk 1416:
Evaluation and implementation of safer medical devices. Conduct an annual review of the exposure control plan and consider new
developments in safer medical devices.

Chunk 1417:
Compliance of water in routine dental procedures with current drinking U.S. Monitor dental water quality as recommended by the equipment manufacturer,

Chunk 1418:
Environmental Protection Agency water standards fewer than 500 CFU of using commercial selfcontained test kits, or commercial watertesting laboratories.
heterotrophic water bacteria.

Chunk 1419:
Proper handling and disposal of medical waste. Observe the safe disposal of regulated and nonregulated medical waste and take
preventive measures if hazardous situations occur.

Chunk 1420:
Healthcareassociated infections. Assess the unscheduled return of patients after procedures and evaluate them for
an infectious process. A trend might require formal evaluation.

Chunk 1421:
38 MMWR December 19, 2003
InfectionControl Research public comment period Box. This list is not exhaustive and
Considerations does not represent a CDC research agenda, but rather is an

Chunk 1422:
effort to identify certain concerns, stimulate discussion, and
Although the number of published studies concerning den
provide direction for determining future action by clinical,

Chunk 1423:
tal infection control has increased in recent years, questions
basic science, and epidemiologic investigators, as well as health
regarding infectioncontrol practices and their effectiveness

Chunk 1424:
and professional organizations, clinicians, and policy makers.
remain unanswered. Multiple concerns were identified by the
working group for this report, as well as by others during the

Chunk 1425:
BOX. Dental infectioncontrol research considerations
Education and promotion
cid127 Design strategies to communicate, to the public and providers, the risk of disease transmission in dentistry.

Chunk 1426:
cid127 Promote use of protocols for recommended postexposure management and followup.

Chunk 1427:
cid127 Educate and train dental healthcare personnel DHCP to screen and evaluate safer dental devices by using tested design
and performance criteria.
Laboratorybased research

Chunk 1428:
cid127 Develop animal models to determine the risk of transmitting organisms through inhalation of contaminated aerosols e.g.,
influenza produced from rotary dental instruments.

Chunk 1429:
cid127 Conduct studies to determine the effectiveness of gloves i.e., material compatibility and duration of use.
cid127 Develop devices with passive safety features to prevent percutaneous injuries.

Chunk 1430:
cid127 Study the effect of alcoholbased handhygiene products on retention of latex proteins and other dental allergens e.g.,

Chunk 1431:
methylmethacrylate, glutaraldehyde, thiurams on the hands of DHCP after latex glove use.

Chunk 1432:
cid127 Investigate the applicability of other types of sterilization procedures e.g., hydrogen peroxide gas plasma in dentistry.

Chunk 1433:
cid127 Encourage manufacturers to determine optimal methods and frequency for testing dentalunit waterlines and maintaining
dentalunit waterquality standards.

Chunk 1434:
cid127 Determine the potential for internal contamination of lowspeed handpieces, including the motor, and other devices con

Chunk 1435:
nected to dental air and water supplies, as well as more efficient ways to clean, lubricate, and sterilize handpieces and other
devices attached to air or waterlines.

Chunk 1436:
cid127 Investigate the infectivity of oral tissues in CreutzfeldtJakob disease CJD or variant CJD patients.
cid127 Determine the most effective methods to disinfect dental impression materials.

Chunk 1437:
cid127 Investigate the viability of pathogenic organisms on dental materials e.g., impression materials, acrylic resin, or gypsum
materials and dental laboratory equipment.

Chunk 1438:
cid127 Determine the most effective methods for sterilization or disinfection of digital radiology equipment.

Chunk 1439:
cid127 Evaluate the effects of repetitive reprocessing cycles on burs and endodontic files.

Chunk 1440:
cid127 Investigate the potential infectivity of vapors generated from the various lasers used for oral procedures.
Clinical and populationbased epidemiologic research and development

Chunk 1441:
cid127 Continue to characterize the epidemiology of blood contacts, particularly percutaneous injuries, and the effectiveness of
prevention measures.

Chunk 1442:
cid127 Further assess the effectiveness of double gloving in preventing blood contact during routine and surgical dental procedures.

Chunk 1443:
cid127 Continue to assess the stress placed on gloves during dental procedures and the potential for developing defects during
different procedures.

Chunk 1444:
cid127 Develop methods for evaluating the effectiveness and costeffectiveness of infectioncontrol interventions.

Chunk 1445:
cid127 Determine how infectioncontrol guidelines affect the knowledge, attitudes, and practices of DHCP.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 39

Chunk 1446:
Recommendations cific to their assigned duties IB, IC 5,11,13,
14,16,19,22.
Each recommendation is categorized on the basis of existing
2. Provide educational information appropriate in

Chunk 1447:
scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. Rankings
content and vocabulary to the educational level,
are based on the system used by CDC and the Healthcare

Chunk 1448:
literacy, and language of DHCP IB, IC 5,13.
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee HICPAC
C. Immunization Programs
to categorize recommendations

Chunk 1449:
1. Develop a written comprehensive policy regard
Category IA. Strongly recommended for implementation
ing immunizing DHCP, including a list of all

Chunk 1450:
and strongly supported by welldesigned experimental, clini
required and recommended immunizations IB
cal, or epidemiologic studies.
5,17,18.
Category IB. Strongly recommended for implementation

Chunk 1451:
2. Refer DHCP to a prearranged qualified health
and supported by experimental, clinical, or epidemiologic stud
care professional or to their own healthcare pro
ies and a strong theoretical rationale.

Chunk 1452:
fessional to receive all appropriate immunizations
Category IC. Required for implementation as mandated
based on the latest recommendations as well as

Chunk 1453:
by federal or state regulation or standard. When IC is used, a
their medical history and risk for occupational
second rating can be included to provide the basis of existing
exposure IB 5,17.

Chunk 1454:
exposure IB 5,17.
scientific data, theoretical rationale, and applicability. Because
D. Exposure Prevention and Postexposure Manage
of state differences, the reader should not assume that the
ment

Chunk 1455:
ment
absence of a IC implies the absence of state regulations.
1. Develop a comprehensive postexposure manage
Category II. Suggested for implementation and supported

Chunk 1456:
ment and medical followup program IB, IC
by suggestive clinical or epidemiologic studies or a theoretical
5,13,14,19.
rationale.
a. Include policies and procedures for prompt

Chunk 1457:
Unresolved issue. No recommendation. Insufficient evi
reporting, evaluation, counseling, treatment,
dence or no consensus regarding efficacy exists.
and medical followup of occupational

Chunk 1458:
I. Personnel Health Elements of an InfectionControl
exposures.
Program
b. Establish mechanisms for referral to a quali
A. General Recommendations
fied healthcare professional for medical

Chunk 1459:
1. Develop a written health program for DHCP
evaluation and followup.
that includes policies, procedures, and guidelines
c. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by

Chunk 1460:
for education and training immunizations
using a twostep test, for all DHCP who
exposure prevention and postexposure manage
might have contact with persons with sus

Chunk 1461:
ment medical conditions, workrelated illness,
pected or confirmed infectious TB, regard
and associated work restrictions contact derma
less of the risk classification of the setting

Chunk 1462:
titis and latex hypersensitivity and maintenance
IB 20.
of records, data management, and confidential
E. Medical Conditions, WorkRelated Illness, and
ity IB 5,1618,22.
Work Restrictions

Chunk 1463:
Work Restrictions
2. Establish referral arrangements with qualified
1. Develop and have readily available to all DHCP
healthcare professionals to ensure prompt and

Chunk 1464:
comprehensive written policies regarding work
appropriate provision of preventive services,
restriction and exclusion that include a statement
occupationally related medical services, and

Chunk 1465:
of authority defining who can implement such
postexposure management with medical follow
policies IB 5,22.
up IB, IC 5,13,19,22.
2. Develop policies for work restriction and exclu

Chunk 1466:
B. Education and Training
sion that encourage DHCP to seek appropriate
1. Provide DHCP 1 on initial employment,
preventive and curative care and report their
2 when new tasks or procedures affect the

Chunk 1467:
illnesses, medical conditions, or treatments that
employees occupational exposure, and 3 at a
can render them more susceptible to opportu
minimum, annually, with education and train

Chunk 1468:
nistic infection or exposures do not penalize
ing regarding occupational exposure to poten
DHCP with loss of wages, benefits, or job sta
tially infectious agents and infectioncontrol
tus IB 5,22.

Chunk 1469:
tus IB 5,22.
proceduresprotocols appropriate for and spe
40 MMWR December 19, 2003
3. Develop policies and procedures for evaluation, the vaccination should sign a declination form

Chunk 1470:
diagnosis, and management of DHCP with sus to be kept on file with the employer IC 13.
pected or known occupational contact dermati B. Preventing Exposures to Blood and OPIM

Chunk 1471:
tis IB 32. 1. General recommendations
4. Seek definitive diagnosis by a qualified health a. Use standard precautions OSHAs blood

Chunk 1472:
care professional for any DHCP with suspected borne pathogen standard retains the term
latex allergy to carefully determine its specific universal precautions for all patient encoun

Chunk 1473:
etiology and appropriate treatment as well as ters IA, IC 11,13,19,53.
work restrictions and accommodations IB 32. b. Consider sharp items e.g., needles, scalers,

Chunk 1474:
F. Records Maintenance, Data Management, and burs, lab knives, and wires that are contami
Confidentiality nated with patient blood and saliva as

Chunk 1475:
1. Establish and maintain confidential medical potentially infective and establish engineer
records e.g., immunization records and docu ing controls and work practices to prevent

Chunk 1476:
mentation of tests received as a result of occupa injuries IB, IC 6,13,113.
tional exposure for all DHCP IB, IC 5,13. c. Implement a written, comprehensive pro

Chunk 1477:
2. Ensure that the practice complies with all appli gram designed to minimize and manage
cable federal, state, and local laws regarding DHCP exposures to blood and body fluids

Chunk 1478:
medical recordkeeping and confidentiality IC IB, IC. 13,14,19,97.
13,34. 2. Engineering and workpractice controls

Chunk 1479:
II. Preventing Transmission of Bloodborne Pathogens a. Identify, evaluate, and select devices with
A. HBV Vaccination engineered safety features at least annually

Chunk 1480:
1. Offer the HBV vaccination series to all DHCP and as they become available on the market
with potential occupational exposure to blood e.g., safer anesthetic syringes, blunt suture

Chunk 1481:
or other potentially infectious material IA, IC needle, retractable scalpel, or needleless IV
2,13,14,19. systems IC 13,97,110112.

Chunk 1482:
2. Always follow U.S. Public Health ServiceCDC b. Place used disposable syringes and needles,
recommendations for hepatitis B vaccination, scalpel blades, and other sharp items in

Chunk 1483:
serologic testing, followup, and booster dosing appropriate punctureresistant containers
IA, IC 13,14,19. located as close as feasible to the area in which

Chunk 1484:
3. Test DHCP for antiHBs 12 months after the items are used IA, IC 2,7,13,19,113,
completion of the 3dose vaccination series IA, 115.
IC 14,19. c. Do not recap used needles by using both

Chunk 1485:
4. DHCP should complete a second 3dose vac hands or any other technique that involves
cine series or be evaluated to determine if they directing the point of a needle toward any

Chunk 1486:
are HBsAgpositive if no antibody response part of the body. Do not bend, break, or
occurs to the primary vaccine series IA, IC remove needles before disposal IA, IC
14,19. 2,7,8,13,97,113.

Chunk 1487:
5. Retest for antiHBs at the completion of the sec d. Use either a onehanded scoop technique or
ond vaccine series. If no response to the second a mechanical device designed for holding the

Chunk 1488:
3dose series occurs, nonresponders should be needle cap when recapping needles e.g.,
tested for HBsAg IC 14,19. between multiple injections and before

Chunk 1489:
6. Counsel nonresponders to vaccination who are removing from a nondisposable aspirating
HBsAgnegative regarding their susceptibility to syringe IA, IC 2,7,8,13,14,113.

Chunk 1490:
HBV infection and precautions to take IA, IC 3. Postexposure management and prophylaxis
14,19. a. Follow CDC recommendations after percu

Chunk 1491:
7. Provide employees appropriate education regard taneous, mucous membrane, or nonintact
ing the risks of HBV transmission and the avail skin exposure to blood or other potentially

Chunk 1492:
ability of the vaccine. Employees who decline infectious material IA, IC 13,14,19.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 41
III. Hand Hygiene 6. Do not wear hand or nail jewelry if it makes

Chunk 1493:
A. General Considerations donning gloves more difficult or compromises
1. Perform hand hygiene with either a the fit and integrity of the glove II 123,142,

Chunk 1494:
nonantimicrobial or antimicrobial soap and 143.
water when hands are visibly dirty or contami IV. PPE
nated with blood or other potentially infectious A. Masks, Protective Eyewear, and Face Shields

Chunk 1495:
material. If hands are not visibly soiled, an alco 1. Wear a surgical mask and eye protection with
holbased hand rub can also be used. Follow the solid side shields or a face shield to protect

Chunk 1496:
manufacturers instructions IA 123. mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth
2. Indications for hand hygiene include during procedures likely to generate splashing

Chunk 1497:
a. when hands are visibly soiled IA, IC or spattering of blood or other body fluids IB,
b. after barehanded touching of inanimate IC 1,2,7,8,11,13,137.

Chunk 1498:
objects likely to be contaminated by blood, 2. Change masks between patients or during
saliva, or respiratory secretions IA, IC patient treatment if the mask becomes wet IB

Chunk 1499:
c. before and after treating each patient IB 2.
d. before donning gloves IB and 3. Clean with soap and water, or if visibly soiled,

Chunk 1500:
e. immediately after removing gloves IB, IC clean and disinfect reusable facial protective
79,11,13,113,120123,125,126,138. equipment e.g., clinician and patient protec

Chunk 1501:
3. For oral surgical procedures, perform surgical tive eyewear or face shields between patients II
hand antisepsis before donning sterile surgeons 2.

Chunk 1502:
gloves. Follow the manufacturers instructions by B. Protective Clothing
using either an antimicrobial soap and water, or 1. Wear protective clothing e.g., reusable or dis

Chunk 1503:
soap and water followed by drying hands and posable gown, laboratory coat, or uniform that
application of an alcoholbased surgical hand covers personal clothing and skin e.g., forearms

Chunk 1504:
scrub product with persistent activity IB 121 likely to be soiled with blood, saliva, or OPIM
123,127133,144,145. IB, IC 7,8,11,13,137.

Chunk 1505:
4. Store liquid handcare products in either dispos 2. Change protective clothing if visibly soiled 134

Chunk 1506:
able closed containers or closed containers that change immediately or as soon as feasible if pen
can be washed and dried before refilling. Do not etrated by blood or other potentially infectious

Chunk 1507:
add soap or lotion to i.e., top off a partially fluids IB, IC 13.
empty dispenser IA 9,120,122,149,150. 3. Remove barrier protection, including gloves,

Chunk 1508:
B. Special Considerations for Hand Hygiene and mask, eyewear, and gown before departing work
Glove Use area e.g., dental patient care, instrument pro

Chunk 1509:
1. Use hand lotions to prevent skin dryness associ cessing, or laboratory areas IC 13.
ated with handwashing IA 153,154. C. Gloves

Chunk 1510:
2. Consider the compatibility of lotion and anti 1. Wear medical gloves when a potential exists for
septic products and the effect of petroleum or contacting blood, saliva, OPIM, or mucous

Chunk 1511:
other oil emollients on the integrity of gloves membranes IB, IC 1,2,7,8,13.
during product selection and glove use IB 2. Wear a new pair of medical gloves for each

Chunk 1512:
2,14,122,155. patient, remove them promptly after use, and
3. Keep fingernails short with smooth, filed edges wash hands immediately to avoid transfer of

Chunk 1513:
to allow thorough cleaning and prevent glove microorganisms to other patients or environ
tears II 122,123,156. ments IB 1,7,8,123.

Chunk 1514:
4. Do not wear artificial fingernails or extenders 3. Remove gloves that are torn, cut, or punctured
when having direct contact with patients at high as soon as feasible and wash hands before

Chunk 1515:
risk e.g., those in intensive care units or operat regloving IB, IC 13,210,211.
ing rooms IA 123,157160. 4. Do not wash surgeons or patient examination

Chunk 1516:
5. Use of artificial fingernails is usually not recom gloves before use or wash, disinfect, or sterilize
mended II 157160. gloves for reuse IB, IC 13,138,177,212,213.
42 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1517:
5. Ensure that appropriate gloves in the correct size 5. Use of heatstable semicritical alternatives is
are readily accessible IC 13. encouraged IB 2.

Chunk 1518:
6. Use appropriate gloves e.g., puncture and 6. Reprocess heatsensitive critical and semicriti
chemicalresistant utility gloves when cleaning cal instruments by using FDAcleared sterilant

Chunk 1519:
instruments and performing housekeeping tasks highlevel disinfectants or an FDAcleared low
involving contact with blood or OPIM IB, IC temperature sterilization method e.g., ethylene

Chunk 1520:
7,13,15. oxide. Follow manufacturers instructions for use
7. Consult with glove manufacturers regarding the of chemical sterilantshighlevel disinfectants

Chunk 1521:
chemical compatibility of glove material and IB 243.
dental materials used II. 7. Singleuse disposable instruments are acceptable

Chunk 1522:
D. Sterile Surgeons Gloves and Double Gloving alternatives if they are used only once and dis
During Oral Surgical Procedures posed of correctly IB, IC 243,383.

Chunk 1523:
1. Wear sterile surgeons gloves when performing 8. Do not use liquid chemical sterilantshighlevel
oral surgical procedures IB 2,8,137. disinfectants for environmental surface disinfec

Chunk 1524:
2. No recommendation is offered regarding the tion or as holding solutions IB, IC 243,245.
effectiveness of wearing two pairs of gloves to 9. Ensure that noncritical patientcare items are

Chunk 1525:
prevent disease transmission during oral surgi barrierprotected or cleaned, or if visibly soiled,
cal procedures. The majority of studies among cleaned and disinfected after each use with an

Chunk 1526:
HCP and DHCP have demonstrated a lower fre EPAregistered hospital disinfectant. If visibly
quency of inner glove perforation and visible contaminated with blood, use an EPAregistered

Chunk 1527:
blood on the surgeons hands when double gloves hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim
are worn however, the effectiveness of wearing i.e., intermediate level IB 2,243,244.

Chunk 1528:
two pairs of gloves in preventing disease trans 10.Inform DHCP of all OSHA guidelines for
mission has not been demonstrated Unresolved exposure to chemical agents used for disinfec

Chunk 1529:
issue. tion and sterilization. Using this report, identify
V. Contact Dermatitis and Latex Hypersensitivity areas and tasks that have potential for exposure
A. General Recommendations IC 15.

Chunk 1530:
1. Educate DHCP regarding the signs, symptoms, B. Instrument Processing Area
and diagnoses of skin reactions associated with fre 1. Designate a central processing area. Divide the

Chunk 1531:
quent hand hygiene and glove use IB 5,31,32. instrument processing area, physically or, at a
2. Screen all patients for latex allergy e.g., take minimum, spatially, into distinct areas for

Chunk 1532:
health history and refer for medical consulta 1 receiving, cleaning, and decontamination
tion when latex allergy is suspected IB 32. 2 preparation and packaging 3 sterilization

Chunk 1533:
3. Ensure a latexsafe environment for patients and and 4 storage. Do not store instruments in an
DHCP with latex allergy IB 32. area where contaminated instruments are held

Chunk 1534:
4. Have emergency treatment kits with latexfree or cleaned II 173,247,248.
products available at all times II 32. 2. Train DHCP to employ work practices that pre

Chunk 1535:
VI. Sterilization and Disinfection of PatientCare Items vent contamination of clean areas II.
A. General Recommendations C. Receiving, Cleaning, and Decontamination Work

Chunk 1536:
1. Use only FDAcleared medical devices for ster Area
ilization and follow the manufacturers instruc 1. Minimize handling of loose contaminated

Chunk 1537:
tions for correct use IB 248. instruments during transport to the instrument
2. Clean and heatsterilize critical dental instru processing area. Use workpractice controls e.g.,

Chunk 1538:
ments before each use IA 2,137,243,244, carry instruments in a covered container to
246,249,407. minimize exposure potential II. Clean all vis

Chunk 1539:
3. Clean and heatsterilize semicritical items before ible blood and other contamination from den
each use IB 2,249,260,407. tal instruments and devices before sterilization

Chunk 1540:
4. Allow packages to dry in the sterilizer before they or disinfection procedures IA 243,249252.
are handled to avoid contamination IB 247. 2. Use automated cleaning equipment e.g., ultra

Chunk 1541:
sonic cleaner or washerdisinfector to remove
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 43
debris to improve cleaning effectiveness and 7. Do not store critical instruments unwrapped IB

Chunk 1542:
decrease worker exposure to blood IB 2,253. 248.
3. Use workpractice controls that minimize con F. Sterilization Monitoring

Chunk 1543:
tact with sharp instruments if manual cleaning 1. Use mechanical, chemical, and biological moni
is necessary e.g., longhandled brush IC 14. tors according to the manufacturers instructions

Chunk 1544:
4. Wear puncture and chemicalresistantheavy to ensure the effectiveness of the sterilization
duty utility gloves for instrument cleaning and process IB 248,278,279.

Chunk 1545:
decontamination procedures IB 7. 2. Monitor each load with mechanical e.g., time,
5. Wear appropriate PPE e.g., mask, protective temperature, and pressure and chemical indi

Chunk 1546:
eyewear, and gown when splashing or spraying cators II 243,248.
is anticipated during cleaning IC 13. 3. Place a chemical indicator on the inside of each

Chunk 1547:
D. Preparation and Packaging package. If the internal indicator is not visible
1. Use an internal chemical indicator in each pack from the outside, also place an exterior chemi

Chunk 1548:
age. If the internal indicator cannot be seen from cal indicator on the package II 243,254,257.
outside the package, also use an external indica 4. Place itemspackages correctly and loosely into

Chunk 1549:
tor II 243,254,257. the sterilizer so as not to impede penetration of
2. Use a container system or wrapping compatible the sterilant IB 243.

Chunk 1550:
with the type of sterilization process used and 5. Do not use instrument packs if mechanical or
that has received FDA clearance IB 243,247, chemical indicators indicate inadequate process

Chunk 1551:
256. ing IB 243,247,248.
3. Before sterilization of critical and semicritical 6. Monitor sterilizers at least weekly by using a bio

Chunk 1552:
instruments, inspect instruments for cleanliness, logical indicator with a matching control i.e.,
then wrap or place them in containers designed biological indicator and control from same lot

Chunk 1553:
to maintain sterility during storage e.g., cassettes number IB 2,9,243,247,278,279.
and organizing trays IA 2,247,255,256. 7. Use a biological indicator for every sterilizer load

Chunk 1554:
E. Sterilization of Unwrapped Instruments that contains an implantable device. Verify
1. Clean and dry instruments before the unwrapped results before using the implantable device,

Chunk 1555:
sterilization cycle IB 248. whenever possible IB 243,248.
2. Use mechanical and chemical indicators for each 8. The following are recommended in the case of a

Chunk 1556:
unwrapped sterilization cycle i.e., place an positive spore test
internal chemical indicator among the instru a. Remove the sterilizer from service and

Chunk 1557:
ments or items to be sterilized IB 243,258. review sterilization procedures e.g., work
3. Allow unwrapped instruments to dry and cool practices and use of mechanical and chemi

Chunk 1558:
in the sterilizer before they are handled to avoid cal indicators to determine whether opera
contamination and thermal injury II 260. tor error could be responsible II 8.

Chunk 1559:
4. Semicritical instruments that will be used b. Retest the sterilizer by using biological,
immediately or within a short time can be ster mechanical, and chemical indicators after

Chunk 1560:
ilized unwrapped on a tray or in a container sys correcting any identified procedural prob
tem, provided that the instruments are handled lems II.

Chunk 1561:
aseptically during removal from the sterilizer and c. If the repeat spore test is negative, and
transport to the point of use II. mechanical and chemical indicators are

Chunk 1562:
5. Critical instruments intended for immediate within normal limits, put the sterilizer back
reuse can be sterilized unwrapped if the instru in service II 9,243.

Chunk 1563:
ments are maintained sterile during removal from 9. The following are recommended if the repeat
the sterilizer and transport to the point of use spore test is positive

Chunk 1564:
e.g., transported in a sterile covered container a. Do not use the sterilizer until it has been
IB 258. inspected or repaired or the exact reason for

Chunk 1565:
6. Do not sterilize implantable devices unwrapped the positive test has been determined II
IB 243,247. 9,243.
44 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1566:
b. Recall, to the extent possible, and reprocess clean e.g., switches on dental chairs and change
all items processed since the last negative surface barriers between patients II 1,2,260,

Chunk 1567:
spore test II 9,243,283. 288.
c. Before placing the sterilizer back in service, 2. Clean and disinfect clinical contact surfaces that

Chunk 1568:
rechallenge the sterilizer with biological are not barrierprotected, by using an EPA
indicator tests in three consecutive empty registered hospital disinfectant with a low i.e.,

Chunk 1569:
chamber sterilization cycles after the cause HIV and HBV label claims to intermediatelevel
of the sterilizer failure has been determined i.e., tuberculocidal claim activity after each

Chunk 1570:
and corrected II 9,243,283. patient. Use an intermediatelevel disinfectant
10.Maintain sterilization records i.e., mechanical, if visibly contaminated with blood IB

Chunk 1571:
chemical, and biological in compliance with 2,243,244.
state and local regulations IB 243. C. Housekeeping Surfaces

Chunk 1572:
G. Storage Area for Sterilized Items and Clean 1. Clean housekeeping surfaces e.g., floors, walls,
Dental Supplies and sinks with a detergent and water or an EPA

Chunk 1573:
1. Implement practices on the basis of date or registered hospital disinfectantdetergent on a
eventrelated shelflife for storage of wrapped, routine basis, depending on the nature of the

Chunk 1574:
sterilized instruments and devices IB 243, surface and type and degree of contamination,
284. and as appropriate, based on the location in the

Chunk 1575:
2. Even for eventrelated packaging, at a minimum, facility, and when visibly soiled IB 243,244.
place the date of sterilization, and if multiple 2. Clean mops and cloths after use and allow to

Chunk 1576:
sterilizers are used in the facility, the sterilizer dry before reuse or use singleuse, disposable
used, on the outside of the packaging material mop heads or cloths II 243,244.

Chunk 1577:
to facilitate the retrieval of processed items in 3. Prepare fresh cleaning or EPAregistered disin
the event of a sterilization failure IB 243,247. fecting solutions daily and as instructed by the

Chunk 1578:
3. Examine wrapped packages of sterilized instru manufacturer. II 243,244.
ments before opening them to ensure the bar 4. Clean walls, blinds, and window curtains in

Chunk 1579:
rier wrap has not been compromised during patientcare areas when they are visibly dusty or
storage II 243,284. soiled II 9,244.

Chunk 1580:
4. Reclean, repack, and resterilize any instrument D. Spills of Blood and Body Substances
package that has been compromised II. 1. Clean spills of blood or OPIM and decontami

Chunk 1581:
5. Store sterile items and dental supplies in cov nate surface with an EPAregistered hospital dis
ered or closed cabinets, if possible II 285. infectant with low i.e., HBV and HIV label

Chunk 1582:
VII. Environmental Infection Control claims to intermediatelevel i.e., tuberculocidal
A. General Recommendations claim activity, depending on size of spill and

Chunk 1583:
1. Follow the manufacturers instructions for cor surface porosity IB, IC 13,113.
rect use of cleaning and EPAregistered hospital E. Carpet and Cloth Furnishings

Chunk 1584:
disinfecting products IB, IC 243245. 1. Avoid using carpeting and clothupholstered
2. Do not use liquid chemical sterilantshighlevel furnishings in dental operatories, laboratories,

Chunk 1585:
disinfectants for disinfection of environmental and instrument processing areas II 9,293
surfaces clinical contact or housekeeping IB, 295.
IC 243245. F. Regulated Medical Waste

Chunk 1586:
3. Use PPE, as appropriate, when cleaning and dis 1. General Recommendations
infecting environmental surfaces. Such equip a. Develop a medical waste management pro

Chunk 1587:
ment might include gloves e.g., puncture and gram. Disposal of regulated medical waste
chemicalresistant utility, protective clothing must follow federal, state, and local regula

Chunk 1588:
e.g., gown, jacket, or lab coat, and protective tions IC 13,301.
eyewearface shield, and mask IC 13,15. b. Ensure that DHCP who handle and dispose

Chunk 1589:
B. Clinical Contact Surfaces of regulated medical waste are trained in
1. Use surface barriers to protect clinical contact appropriate handling and disposal methods

Chunk 1590:
surfaces, particularly those that are difficult to
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 45
and informed of the possible health and operative unit, ultrasonic scaler, or other

Chunk 1591:
safety hazards IC 13. dental equipment that uses the public water
2. Management of Regulated Medical Waste in system IB, IC 341,342,346,349,350.

Chunk 1592:
Dental HealthCare Facilities b. Do not use water from the public water sys
a. Use a colorcoded or labeled container that tem for dental treatment, patient rinsing, or

Chunk 1593:
prevents leakage e.g., biohazard bag to con handwashing IB, IC 341,342,346,349,
tain nonsharp regulated medical waste IC 350.
13. c. For handwashing, use antimicrobial

Chunk 1594:
b. Place sharp items e.g., needles, scalpel containing products that do not require
blades, orthodontic bands, broken metal water for use e.g., alcoholbased hand rubs.

Chunk 1595:
instruments, and burs in an appropriate If hands are visibly contaminated, use bottled
sharps container e.g., puncture resistant, water, if available, and soap for handwashing

Chunk 1596:
colorcoded, and leakproof. Close container or an antiseptic towelette IB, IC 13,122.
immediately before removal or replacement 2. The following apply when the boilwater

Chunk 1597:
to prevent spillage or protrusion of contents advisory is cancelled
during handling, storage, transport, or ship a. Follow guidance given by the local water

Chunk 1598:
ping IC 2,8,13,113,115. utility regarding adequate flushing of water
c. Pour blood, suctioned fluids or other liquid lines. If no guidance is provided, flush den

Chunk 1599:
waste carefully into a drain connected to a tal waterlines and faucets for 15 minutes
sanitary sewer system, if local sewage dis before using for patient care IC 244,346,

Chunk 1600:
charge requirements are met and the state 351,352.
has declared this an acceptable method of b. Disinfect dental waterlines as recommended

Chunk 1601:
disposal. Wear appropriate PPE while per by the dental unit manufacturer II.
forming this task IC 7,9,13. IX. Special Considerations

Chunk 1602:
VIII. Dental Unit Waterlines, Biofilm, and Water Quality A. Dental Handpieces and Other Devices Attached
A. General Recommendations to Air and Waterlines

Chunk 1603:
1. Use water that meets EPA regulatory standards 1. Clean and heatsterilize handpieces and other
for drinking water i.e., 500 CFUmL of het intraoral instruments that can be removed from

Chunk 1604:
erotrophic water bacteria for routine dental the air and waterlines of dental units between
treatment output water IB, IC 341,342. patients IB, IC 2,246,275,356,357,360,407.

Chunk 1605:
2. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer for 2. Follow the manufacturers instructions for clean
appropriate methods and equipment to main ing, lubrication, and sterilization of handpieces

Chunk 1606:
tain the recommended quality of dental water and other intraoral instruments that can be
II 339. removed from the air and waterlines of dental

Chunk 1607:
3. Follow recommendations for monitoring water units IB 361363.
quality provided by the manufacturer of the unit 3. Do not surfacedisinfect, use liquid chemical ste

Chunk 1608:
or waterline treatment product II. rilants, or ethylene oxide on handpieces and
4. Discharge water and air for a minimum of 20 other intraoral instruments that can be removed

Chunk 1609:
30 seconds after each patient, from any device from the air and waterlines of dental units IC
connected to the dental water system that enters 2,246,250,275.

Chunk 1610:
the patients mouth e.g., handpieces, ultrasonic 4. Do not advise patients to close their lips tightly
scalers, and airwater syringes II 2,311,344. around the tip of the saliva ejector to evacuate

Chunk 1611:
5. Consult with the dental unit manufacturer on oral fluids II 364366.
the need for periodic maintenance of B. Dental Radiology

Chunk 1612:
antiretraction mechanisms IB 2,311. 1. Wear gloves when exposing radiographs and
B. BoilWater Advisories handling contaminated film packets. Use other

Chunk 1613:
1. The following apply while a boilwater advisory PPE e.g., protective eyewear, mask, and gown
is in effect as appropriate if spattering of blood or other

Chunk 1614:
a. Do not deliver water from the public water body fluids is likely IA, IC 11,13.
system to the patient through the dental
46 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1615:
2. Use heattolerant or disposable intraoral devices 5. Use fluid infusion and administration sets i.e.,
whenever possible e.g., filmholding and posi IV bags, tubings and connections for one

Chunk 1616:
tioning devices. Clean and heatsterilize heat patient only and dispose of appropriately IB
tolerant devices between patients. At a 378.

Chunk 1617:
minimum, highlevel disinfect semicritical heat D. SingleUse Disposable Devices
sensitive devices, according to manufacturers 1. Use singleuse devices for one patient only and

Chunk 1618:
instructions IB 243. dispose of them appropriately IC 383.
3. Transport and handle exposed radiographs in an E. Preprocedural Mouth Rinses

Chunk 1619:
aseptic manner to prevent contamination of 1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of
developing equipment II. preprocedural antimicrobial mouth rinses to

Chunk 1620:
4. The following apply for digital radiography prevent clinical infections among DHCP or pa
sensors tients. Although studies have demonstrated that

Chunk 1621:
a. Use FDAcleared barriers IB 243. a preprocedural antimicrobial rinse e.g.,
b. Clean and heatsterilize, or highlevel disin chlorhexidine gluconate, essential oils, or povi

Chunk 1622:
fect, between patients, barrierprotected doneiodine can reduce the level of oral micro
semicritical items. If the item cannot toler organisms in aerosols and spatter generated

Chunk 1623:
ate these procedures then, at a minimum, during routine dental procedures and can
protect with an FDAcleared barrier and decrease the number of microorganisms intro

Chunk 1624:
clean and disinfect with an EPAregistered duced in the patients bloodstream during inva
hospital disinfectant with intermediatelevel sive dental procedures 391399, the scientific

Chunk 1625:
i.e., tuberculocidal claim activity, between evidence is inconclusive that using these rinses
patients. Consult with the manufacturer for prevents clinical infections among DHCP or

Chunk 1626:
methods of disinfection and sterilization of patients see discussion, Preprocedural Mouth
digital radiology sensors and for protection Rinses Unresolved issue.

Chunk 1627:
of associated computer hardware IB 243. F. Oral Surgical Procedures
C. Aseptic Technique for Parenteral Medications 1. The following apply when performing oral sur

Chunk 1628:
1. Do not administer medication from a syringe to gical procedures
multiple patients, even if the needle on the a. Perform surgical hand antisepsis by using an

Chunk 1629:
syringe is changed IA 378. antimicrobial product e.g., antimicrobial
2. Use singledose vials for parenteral medications soap and water, or soap and water followed

Chunk 1630:
when possible II 376,377. by alcoholbased hand scrub with persistent
3. Do not combine the leftover contents of single activity before donning sterile surgeons

Chunk 1631:
use vials for later use IA 376,377. gloves IB 127132,137.
4. The following apply if multidose vials are used b. Use sterile surgeons gloves IB 2,7,121,

Chunk 1632:
a. Cleanse the access diaphragm with 70 123,137.
alcohol before inserting a device into the vial c. Use sterile saline or sterile water as a cool
IA 380,381. antirrigatant when performing oral surgi

Chunk 1633:
b. Use a sterile device to access a multipledose cal procedures. Use devices specifically
vial and avoid touching the access diaphragm. designed for delivering sterile irrigating flu

Chunk 1634:
Both the needle and syringe used to access ids e.g., bulb syringe, singleuse disposable
the multidose vial should be sterile. Do not products, and sterilizable tubing IB

Chunk 1635:
reuse a syringe even if the needle is changed 2,121.
IA 380,381. G. Handling of Biopsy Specimens
c. Keep multidose vials away from the imme 1. During transport, place biopsy specimens in a

Chunk 1636:
diate patient treatment area to prevent inad sturdy, leakproof container labeled with the bio
vertent contamination by spray or spatter hazard symbol IC 2,13,14.

Chunk 1637:
II. 2. If a biopsy specimen container is visibly con
d. Discard the multidose vial if sterility is com taminated, clean and disinfect the outside of a
promised IA 380,381.

Chunk 1638:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 47
container or place it in an impervious bag 1. No recommendation is offered regarding prac

Chunk 1639:
labeled with the biohazard symbol, IC 2,13. tices to reduce DHCP exposure to laser plumes
H. Handling of Extracted Teeth surgical smoke when using lasers in dental prac

Chunk 1640:
1. Dispose of extracted teeth as regulated medical tice. Practices to reduce HCP exposure to laser
waste unless returned to the patient IC 13,14. plumessurgical smoke have been suggested,

Chunk 1641:
2. Do not dispose of extracted teeth containing including use of a standard precautions e.g.,
amalgam in regulated medical waste intended highfiltration surgical masks and possibly full

Chunk 1642:
for incineration II. face shields 437 b central room suction units
3. Clean and place extracted teeth in a leakproof with inline filters to collect particulate matter

Chunk 1643:
container, labeled with a biohazard symbol, and from minimal plumes and c dedicated
maintain hydration for transport to educational mechanical smoke exhaust systems with a high

Chunk 1644:
institutions or a dental laboratory IC 13,14. efficiency filter to remove substantial amounts
4. Heatsterilize teeth that do not contain amal of laserplume particles. The effect of the expo

Chunk 1645:
gam before they are used for educational pur sure e.g., disease transmission or adverse respi
poses IB 403,405,406. ratory effects on DHCP from dental

Chunk 1646:
I. Dental Laboratory applications of lasers has not been adequately
1. Use PPE when handling items received in the evaluated see previous discussion, Laser

Chunk 1647:
laboratory until they have been decontaminated Electrosurgery Plumes or Surgical Smoke
IA, IC 2,7,11,13,113. Unresolved issue.

Chunk 1648:
2. Before they are handled in the laboratory, clean, K. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
disinfect, and rinse all dental prostheses and 1. General Recommendations

Chunk 1649:
prosthodontic materials e.g., impressions, bite a. Educate all DHCP regarding the recogni
registrations, occlusal rims, and extracted teeth tion of signs, symptoms, and transmission

Chunk 1650:
by using an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant of TB IB 20,21.
having at least an intermediatelevel i.e., tuber b. Conduct a baseline TST, preferably by

Chunk 1651:
culocidal claim activity IB 2,249,252,407. using a twostep test, for all DHCP who
3. Consult with manufacturers regarding the sta might have contact with persons with sus

Chunk 1652:
bility of specific materials e.g., impression pected or confirmed active TB, regardless of
materials relative to disinfection procedures II. the risk classification of the setting IB 20.

Chunk 1653:
4. Include specific information regarding disinfec c. Assess each patient for a history of TB as well
tion techniques used e.g., solution used and as symptoms indicative of TB and document

Chunk 1654:
duration, when laboratory cases are sent off on the medical history form IB 20,21.
site and on their return II 2,407,409. d. Follow CDC recommendations for 1

Chunk 1655:
5. Clean and heatsterilize heattolerant items used developing, maintaining, and implementing
in the mouth e.g., metal impression trays and a written TB infectioncontrol plan 2 man

Chunk 1656:
facebow forks IB 2,407. aging a patient with suspected or active TB
6. Follow manufacturers instructions for cleaning 3 completing a community riskassessment

Chunk 1657:
and sterilizing or disinfecting items that become to guide employee TSTs and followup and
contaminated but do not normally contact the 4 managing DHCP with TB disease IB

Chunk 1658:
patient e.g., burs, polishing points, rag wheels, 2,21.
articulators, case pans, and lathes. If manufac 2. The following apply for patients known or sus

Chunk 1659:
turer instructions are unavailable, clean and heat pected to have active TB
sterilize heattolerant items or clean and disinfect a. Evaluate the patient away from other patients

Chunk 1660:
with an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant with and DHCP. When not being evaluated, the
low HIV, HBV effectiveness claim to inter patient should wear a surgical mask or be

Chunk 1661:
mediatelevel tuberculocidal claim activity, instructed to cover mouth and nose when
depending on the degree of contamination II. coughing or sneezing IB 20,21.

Chunk 1662:
J. LaserElectrosurgery PlumesSurgical Smoke b. Defer elective dental treatment until the
patient is noninfectious IB 20,21.
48 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1663:
c. Refer patients requiring urgent dental treat CDC, NIOSH
ment to a previously identified facility with httpwww.cdc.govnioshhomepage.html

Chunk 1664:
TB engineering controls and a respiratory CDC Recommends, Prevention Guidelines System
protection program IB 20,21. httpwww.phppo.cdc.govcdcRecommendsAdvSearchV.asp

Chunk 1665:
L. CreutzfeldtJakob Disease CJD and Other Prion EPA, Antimicrobial Chemicals
Diseases httpwww.epa.govoppad001chemregindex.htm
1. No recommendation is offered regarding use of FDA

Chunk 1666:
special precautions in addition to standard pre httpwww.fda.gov
cautions when treating known CJD or vCJD Immunization Action Coalition

Chunk 1667:
patients. Potential infectivity of oral tissues in httpwww.immunize.orgacip
CJD or vCJD patients is an unresolved issue. Infectious Diseases Society of America

Chunk 1668:
Scientific data indicate the risk, if any, of spo httpwww.idsociety.orgPGtoc.htm
radic CJD transmission during dental and oral OSHA, Dentistry, Bloodborne Pathogens

Chunk 1669:
surgical procedures is low to nil. Until additional httpwww.osha.govSLTCdentistryindex.html
information exists regarding the transmissibility httpwww.osha.govSLTCbloodbornepathogensindex.html

Chunk 1670:
of CJD or vCJD during dental procedures, spe Organization for Safety and Asepsis Procedures
cial precautions in addition to standard precau httpwww.osap.org

Chunk 1671:
tions might be indicated when treating known Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Inc.,
CJD or vCJD patients a list of such precau Position Papers

Chunk 1672:
tions is provided for consideration without rec httpwww.sheaonline.orgPositionPapers.html
ommendation see CreutzfeldtJakob Disease
and Other Prion Diseases Unresolved issue. Acknowledgement

Chunk 1673:
M.Program Evaluation The Division of Oral Health thanks the working group as well as
1. Establish routine evaluation of the infection CDC and other federal and external reviewers for their efforts in

Chunk 1674:
control program, including evaluation of per developing and reviewing drafts of this report and acknowledges that
all opinions of the reviewers might not be reflected in all of the

Chunk 1675:
formance indicators, at an established frequency
recommendations.
II 470471.
References
1.CDC. Recommended infectioncontrol practices for dentistry. MMWR
InfectionControl Internet Resources

Chunk 1676:
19863523742.
2.CDC. Recommended infectioncontrol practices for dentistry, 1993.
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
MMWR 199342No. RR8.
httpwww.cdc.govnipACIPdefault.htm

Chunk 1677:
3.US Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States 2001.
American Dental Association Washington, DC US Census Bureau, 2001. Available at httpwww.

Chunk 1678:
httpwww.ada.org census.govprodwwwstatisticalabstract02.html.
American Institute of Architects Academy of Architec 4.Health Resources and Services Administration, Bureau of Health Pro

Chunk 1679:
fessions. United States health workforce personnel factbook. Rockville,
ture for Health
MD US Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources
httpwww.aahaia.org

Chunk 1680:
httpwww.aahaia.org
and Services Administration, 2000.
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, Aircondi
5.Bolyard EA, Tablan OC, Williams WW, Pearson ML, Shapiro CN,

Chunk 1681:
tioning Engineers Deitchman SD, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Com
httpwww.ashrae.org mittee. Guideline for infection control in health care personnel, 1998.

Chunk 1682:
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Am J Infect Control 199826289354.
6.Greene VW. Microbiological contamination control in hospitals.
Epidemiology, Inc.

Chunk 1683:
Epidemiology, Inc.
1. Perspectives. Hospitals 1969437888.
httpwww.apic.orgrescguidlist.cfm
7.CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion

Chunk 1684:
CDC, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion update universal precautions for prevention of transmission of

Chunk 1685:
httpwww.cdc.govncidodhip human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne

Chunk 1686:
CDC, Division of Oral Health, Infection Control pathogens in healthcare settings. MMWR 198838377382, 3878.
httpwww.cdc.govOralHealthinfectioncontrolindex.htm

Chunk 1687:
CDC, Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
httpwww.cdc.govmmwr
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 49

Chunk 1688:
8.CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immuno 29.Zaza S, Reeder JM, Charles LE, Jarvis WR. Latex sensitivity among

Chunk 1689:
deficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to healthcare and publicsafety perioperative nurses. AORN J 19946080612.

Chunk 1690:
workers a response to P.L. 100607 The Health Omnibus Programs 30.Hunt LW, Fransway AF, Reed CE, et al. An epidemic of occupational

Chunk 1691:
Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 198938suppl No. 6S. allergy to latex involving health care workers. J Occup Environ Med
9.Garner JS, Favero MS. CDC guideline for handwashing and hospital 19953712049.

Chunk 1692:
environmental control, 1985. Infect Control 1986723143. 31.American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. The dental

Chunk 1693:
10.CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health team and latex hypersensitivity. J Am Dent Assoc 199913025764.

Chunk 1694:
care settings. MMWR 198736suppl No. 2S. 32.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH

Chunk 1695:
11.Garner JS, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Alert preventing allergic reactions to natural rubber latex in the work

Chunk 1696:
Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect Control Hosp place. Cincinnati, OH US Department of Health and Human Ser

Chunk 1697:
Epidemiol 1996175380. vices, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational
12.Chiarello LA, Bartley J. Prevention of blood exposure in healthcare Safety and Health, 1997.

Chunk 1698:
personnel. Seminars in Infection Control 200113043. 33.Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA. Personal protective equipment and bar

Chunk 1699:
13.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis rier techniques. In Cottone JA, Terezhalmy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Prac

Chunk 1700:
tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne tical infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD Williams

Chunk 1701:
pathogens needlesticks and other sharps injuries final rule. Federal Wilkins, 1996136145.

Chunk 1702:
Register 200166531725. As amended from and includes 29 CFR 34.US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Secre

Chunk 1703:
Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens tary, Office for Civil Rights. 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164. Standards for

Chunk 1704:
final rule. Federal Register 1991566417482. Available at httpwww. privacy of individually identifiable health information final rule. Fed

Chunk 1705:
osha.govSLTCdentistryindex.html. eral Register 20006582462829.
14.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis 35.Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Access to medical

Chunk 1706:
tration. OSHA instruction enforcement procedures for the occupa and exposure records. Washington, DC US Department of Labor,

Chunk 1707:
tional exposure to bloodborne pathogens. Washington, DC US Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2001. OSHA publi

Chunk 1708:
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administra cation no. 3110.
tion, 2001 directive no. CPL 22.69. 36.Mast EE, Alter MJ. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection among

Chunk 1709:
15.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis healthcare workers. In Ellis RW, ed. Hepatitis B vaccines in clinical

Chunk 1710:
tration. 29 CFR 1910.1200. Hazard communication. Federal Regis practice. New York, NY Marcel Dekker, 1993295307.
ter 19945917479. 37.Beltrami EM, Williams IT, Shapiro CN, Chamberland ME. Risk and

Chunk 1711:
16.Gershon RR, Karkashian CD, Grosch JW, et al. Hospital safety cli management of bloodborne infections in health care workers. Clin

Chunk 1712:
mate and its relationship with safe work practices and workplace expo Microbiol Rev 200013385407.

Chunk 1713:
sure incidents. Am J Infect Control 20002821121. 38.Werner BG, Grady GF. Accidental hepatitisBsurfaceantigen

Chunk 1714:
17.CDC. Immunization of healthcare workers recommendations of the positive inoculations use of e antigen to estimate infectivity. Ann

Chunk 1715:
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ACIP and the Hos Intern Med 1982973679.

Chunk 1716:
pital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee HICPAC. 39.Bond WW, Petersen NJ, Favero MS. Viral hepatitis B aspects of envi
MMWR 199746No. RR18. ronmental control. Health Lab Sci 19771423552.

Chunk 1717:
18.Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology. APIC 40.Garibaldi RA, Hatch FE, Bisno AL, Hatch MH, Gregg MB.

Chunk 1718:
position paper immunization. Am J Infect Control 199927523. Nonparenteral serum hepatitis report of an outbreak. JAMA 1972

Chunk 1719:
19.CDC. Updated U.S. Public Health Service guidelines for the manage 2209636.

Chunk 1720:
ment of occupational exposures to HBV, HCV, and HIV and recommen 41.Rosenberg JL, Jones DP, Lipitz LR, Kirsner JB. Viral hepatitis an

Chunk 1721:
dations for postexposure prophylaxis. MMWR 200150No. RR11. occupational hazard to surgeons. JAMA 1973223395400.

Chunk 1722:
20.CDC. Guidelines for preventing the transmission of Mycobacterium 42.Callender ME, White YS, Williams R. Hepatitis B virus infection in

Chunk 1723:
tuberculosis in healthcare facilities, 1994. MMWR 199443No. RR13. medical and health care personnel. Br Med J 19822843246.

Chunk 1724:
21.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Bolyard EA, Simone PM, Mullan RJ, 43.Chaudhuri AK, Follett EA. Hepatitis B virus infection in medical and

Chunk 1725:
Marianos DW. TB infection control recommendations from the CDC, health care personnel Letter. Br Med J 19822841408.

Chunk 1726:
1994 considerations for dentistry. J Am Dent Assoc 19951265939. 44.Bond WW, Favero MS, Petersen NJ, Gravelle CR, Ebert JW, Maynard

Chunk 1727:
22.Herwaldt LA, Pottinger JM, Carter CD, Barr BA, Miller ED. Expo JE. Survival of hepatitis B virus after drying and storage for one week

Chunk 1728:
sure workups. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 19971885071. Letter. Lancet 198115501.

Chunk 1729:
23.Nash KD. How infection control procedures are affecting dental prac 45.Francis DP, Favero MS, Maynard JE. Transmission of hepatitis B virus

Chunk 1730:
tice today. J Am Dent Assoc 19921236773. Review. Semin Liver Dis 198112732.

Chunk 1731:
24.Berky ZT, Luciano WJ, James WD. Latex glove allergy a survey of the 46.Favero MS, Maynard JE, Petersen NJ, et al. HepatitisB antigen on

Chunk 1732:
US Army Dental Corps. JAMA 199226826957. environmental surfaces Letter. Lancet 197321455.

Chunk 1733:
25.Bubak ME, Reed CE, Fransway AF, et al. Allergic reactions to latex 47.Lauer JL, VanDrunen NA, Washburn JW, Balfour HH Jr. Transmis

Chunk 1734:
among healthcare workers. Mayo Clin Proc 19926710759. sion of hepatitis B virus in clinical laboratory areas. J Infect Dis

Chunk 1735:
26.Fisher AA. Allergic contact reactions in health personnel. J Allergy Clin 19791405136.
Immunol 19929072938. 48.Hennekens CH. Hemodialysisassociated hepatitis an outbreak among

Chunk 1736:
27.Smart ER, Macleod RI, Lawrence CM. Allergic reactions to rubber gloves hospital personnel. JAMA 19732254078.

Chunk 1737:
in dental patients report of three cases. Br Dent J 19921724457. 49.Garibaldi RA, Forrest JN, Bryan JA, Hanson BF, Dismukes WE.

Chunk 1738:
28.Yassin MS, Lierl MB, Fischer TJ, OBrien K, Cross J, Steinmetz C. Hemodialysisassociated hepatitis. JAMA 19732253849.
Latex allergy in hospital employees. Ann Allergy 1994722459.

Chunk 1739:
50 MMWR December 19, 2003
50.Snydman DR, Bryan JA, Macon EJ, Gregg MB. Hemodialysisassociated 73.Lanphear BP, Linnemann CC Jr, Cannon CG, DeRonde MM, Pendy

Chunk 1740:
hepatitis a report of an epidemic with further evidence on mecha L, Kerley LM. Hepatitis C virus infection in healthcare workers risk

Chunk 1741:
nisms of transmission. Am J Epidemiol 197610456370. of exposure and infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994
51.Shapiro CN. Occupational risk of infection with hepatitis B and hepa 1574550.

Chunk 1742:
titis C virus. Surg Clin North Am 199575104756. 74.Mitsui T, Iwano K, Masuko K, et al. Hepatitis C virus infection in

Chunk 1743:
52.Cleveland JL, Siew C, Lockwood SA, Gruninger SE, Gooch BF, Shapiro medical personnel after needlestick accident. Hepatology 199216

Chunk 1744:
CN. Hepatitis B vaccination and infection among U.S. dentists, 1983 110914.
1992. J Am Dent Assoc 1996127138590. 75.Sartori M, La Terra G, Aglietta M, Manzin A, Navino C, Verzetti G.

Chunk 1745:
53.CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of human Transmission of hepatitis C via blood splash into conjunctiva. Scand

Chunk 1746:
immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during J Infect Dis 1993252701.

Chunk 1747:
exposureprone invasive procedures. MMWR 199140No. RR8. 76.Ippolito G, Puro V, De Carli G. The risk of occupational human

Chunk 1748:
54.Chamberland ME. HIV transmission from health care worker to immunodeficiency virus in health care workers Italian Multicenter

Chunk 1749:
patient what is the risk Letter? Ann Intern Med 19921168713. Study, The Italian Study Group on Occupational Risk of HIV Infec

Chunk 1750:
55.Robert LM, Chamberland ME, Cleveland JL, et al. Investigation of tion. Arch Intern Med 199315314518.

Chunk 1751:
patients of health care workers infected with HIV the Centers for Disease 77.Beltrami EM, Kozak A, Williams IT, et al. Transmission of HIV and

Chunk 1752:
Control and Prevention database. Ann Intern Med 19951226537. hepatitis C virus from a nursing home patient to a health care worker.

Chunk 1753:
56.CDC. Investigations of persons treated by HIVinfected healthcare Am J Infec Control. 2003 3116875.

Chunk 1754:
workersUnited States. MMWR 199342329331, 337. 78.Cooper BW, Krusell A, Tilton RC, Goodwin R, Levitz RE.

Chunk 1755:
57.Siew C, Chang SB, Gruninger SE, Verrusio AC, Neidle EA. Self Seroprevalence of antibodies to hepatitis C virus in highrisk hospital

Chunk 1756:
reported percutaneous injuries in dentists implications for HBV, HIV, personnel. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 199213825.

Chunk 1757:
transmission risk. J Am Dent Assoc 19921233644. 79.Panlilio AL, Shapiro CN, Schable CA, et al. Serosurvey of human

Chunk 1758:
58.Ahtone J, Goodman RA. Hepatitis B and dental personnel transmission immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus infec

Chunk 1759:
to patients and prevention issues. J Am Dent Assoc 198310621922. tion among hospitalbased surgeons. Serosurvey Study Group. J Am

Chunk 1760:
59.Hadler SC, Sorley DL, Acree KH, et al. An outbreak of hepatitis B in Coll Surg 19951801624.

Chunk 1761:
a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1981951338. 80.Polish LB, Tong MJ, Co RL, Coleman PJ, Alter MJ. Risk factors for

Chunk 1762:
60.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports hepatitis B among dental hepatitis C virus infection among health care personnel in a commu

Chunk 1763:
patientsIndiana. MMWR 198534735. nity hospital. Am J Infect Control 199321196200.

Chunk 1764:
61.Levin ML, Maddrey WC, Wands JR, Mendeloff AL. Hepatitis B trans 81.Shapiro CN, Tokars JI, Chamberland ME, American Academy of

Chunk 1765:
mission by dentists. JAMA 1974228113940. Orthopaedic Surgeons Serosurvey Study Committee. Use of the

Chunk 1766:
62.Rimland D, Parkin WE, Miller GB Jr, Schrack WD. Hepatitis B out hepatitisB vaccine and infection with hepatitis B and C among

Chunk 1767:
break traced to an oral surgeon. N Engl J Med 19772969538. orthopaedic surgeons. J Bone Joint Surg Am 1996781791800.

Chunk 1768:
63.Goodwin D, Fannin SL, McCracken BB. An oral surgeonrelated 82.Gerberding JL. Incidence and prevalence of human immunodeficiency

Chunk 1769:
hepatitisB outbreak. California Morbidity 1976141. virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and cytomegalovirus among

Chunk 1770:
64.Reingold AL, Kane MA, Murphy BL, Checko P, Francis DP, Maynard health care personnel at risk for blood exposure final report from a

Chunk 1771:
JE. Transmission of hepatitis B by an oral surgeon. J Infect Dis 1982 longitudinal study. J Infect Dis 199417014107.
1452628. 83.Klein RS, Freeman K, Taylor PE, Stevens CE. Occupational risk for

Chunk 1772:
65.Goodman RA, Ahtone JL, Finton RJ. Hepatitis B transmission from hepatitis C virus infection among New York City dentists. Lancet

Chunk 1773:
dental personnel to patients unfinished business. Ann Intern Med 1991338153942.
198296119. 84.Thomas DL, Gruninger SE, Siew C, Joy ED, Quinn TC. Occupa

Chunk 1774:
66.Shaw FE Jr, Barrett CL, Hamm R, et al. Lethal outbreak of hepatitis B tional risk of hepatitis C infections among general dentists and oral

Chunk 1775:
in a dental practice. JAMA 198625532604. surgeons in North America. Am J Med 1996100415.

Chunk 1776:
67.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports outbreak of hepatitis B associ 85.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Shearer BG, Lyerla RL. Risk and prevention

Chunk 1777:
ated with an oral surgeonNew Hampshire. MMWR 1987361323. of hepatitis C virus infection implications for dentistry. J Am Dent

Chunk 1778:
68.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis Assoc 19991306417.

Chunk 1779:
tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne 86.Gruninger SE, Siew C, Azzolin KL, Meyer DM. Update of hepatitis C

Chunk 1780:
pathogens final rule. Federal Register 19915664004182. infection among dental professionals Abstract 1825. J Dent Res

Chunk 1781:
69.CDC. Hepatitis B virus a comprehensive strategy for eliminating trans 200180264.

Chunk 1782:
mission in the United States through universal childhood vaccination 87.Esteban JI, Gomez J, Martell M, et al. Transmission of hepatitis C

Chunk 1783:
recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Commit virus by a cardiac surgeon. N Engl J Med 199633455560.

Chunk 1784:
tee ACIP. MMWR 199140No. RR13. 88.Duckworth GJ, Heptonstall J, Aitken C. Transmission of hepatitis C

Chunk 1785:
70.Polish LB, Gallagher M, Fields HA, Hadler SC. Delta hepatitis virus from a surgeon to a patient the Incident Control Team. Commun

Chunk 1786:
molecular biology and clinical and epidemiological features. Clin Dis Public Health 1999218892.
Microbiol Rev 1993621129. 89.Ross RS, Viazov S, Gross T, Hofmann F, Seipp HM, Roggendorf M.

Chunk 1787:
71.Alter MJ. The epidemiology of acute and chronic hepatitis C. Clin Brief report transmission of hepatitis C virus from a patient to an anes

Chunk 1788:
Liver Dis 1997155968. thesiology assistant to five patients. N Engl J Med 200034318514.

Chunk 1789:
72.Puro V, Petrosillo N, Ippolito G. Risk of hepatitis C seroconversion 90.Cody SH, Nainan OV, Garfein RS, et al. Hepatitis C virus transmis

Chunk 1790:
after occupational exposures in health care workers Italian Study Group sion from an anesthesiologist to a patient. Arch Intern Med 2002

Chunk 1791:
on Occupational Risk of HIV and Other Bloodborne Infections. Am J 16234550.
Infect Control 1995232737.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 51

Chunk 1792:
91.Do AN, Ciesielski CA, Metler RP, Hammett TA, Li J, Fleming PL. 109.US Department of Labor, Occupational Health and Safety Adminis

Chunk 1793:
Occupationally acquired human immunodeficiency virus HIV tration. 29 CFR Part 1910. Occupational exposure to bloodborne

Chunk 1794:
infection national case surveillance data during 20 years of the HIV pathogens needlesticks and other sharps injuries, final rule. Federal

Chunk 1795:
epidemic in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol Register 2001665325.
2003248696. 110.CDC. Evaluation of safety devices for preventing percutaneous inju

Chunk 1796:
92.Ciesielski C, Marianos D, Ou CY, et al. Transmission of human ries among healthcare workers during phlebotomy procedures

Chunk 1797:
immunodeficiency virus in a dental practice. Ann Intern Med 1992 MinneapolisSt. Paul, New York City, and San Francisco, 19931995.
116798805. MMWR 199746215.

Chunk 1798:
93.CDC. Investigations of patients who have been treated by HIV 111.CDC. Evaluation of blunt suture needles in preventing percutaneous

Chunk 1799:
infected healthcare workersUnited States. MMWR 199342 injuries among healthcare workers during gynecologic surgical proce
32931, 337. duresNew York City, March 1993June 1994. MMWR 1997

Chunk 1800:
94.Bell DM. Occupational risk of human immunodeficiency virus infec 46259.
tion in healthcare workers an overview. Am J Med 19971025B915. 112.Mendelson MH, LinChen BY, Solomon R, Bailey E, Kogan G,

Chunk 1801:
95.Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al, Centers for Disease Con Goldbold J. Evaluation of a safety resheathable winged steel needle for

Chunk 1802:
trol and Prevention Needlestick Surveillance Group. A casecontrol prevention of percutaneous injuries associated with intravascular

Chunk 1803:
study of HIV seroconversion in health care workers after percutaneous access procedures among healthcare workers. Infect Control Hosp
exposure. N Engl J Med 1997337148590. Epidemiol 20032410512.

Chunk 1804:
96.Beltrami EM. The risk and prevention of occupational human immuno 113.CDC. Recommendations for prevention of HIV transmission in health

Chunk 1805:
deficiency virus infection. Seminars in Infection Control 20011218. care settings. MMWR 198736No. S2.

Chunk 1806:
97.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 114.CDC. Guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immuno

Chunk 1807:
alert Preventing needlestick injuries in health care settings. Cincin deficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to healthcare and publicsafety

Chunk 1808:
nati, OH US Department of Health and Human Services, Public workers a response to P.L. 100607. The Health Omnibus Programs

Chunk 1809:
Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Extension Act of 1988. MMWR 198938No. S6.
Health, 1999. 115.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Select

Chunk 1810:
98.Klein RS, Phelan JA, Freeman K, et al. Low occupational risk of ing, evaluating, and using sharps disposal containers. Cincinnati, OH

Chunk 1811:
human immunodeficiency virus infection among dental professionals. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser

Chunk 1812:
N Engl J Med 19883188690. vice, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,
99.Gruninger SE, Siew C, Chang SB, et al. Human immunodeficiency 1998. DHHS publication no. NIOSH 97111.

Chunk 1813:
virus type I infection among dentists. J Am Dent Assoc 19921235964. 116.CDC. Public Health Service statement on management of occupa

Chunk 1814:
100.Siew C, Gruninger SE, Miaw CL, Neidle EA. Percutaneous injuries in tional exposure to human immunodeficiency virus, including consid

Chunk 1815:
practicing dentists a propective study using a 20day diary. J Am Dent erations regarding zidovudine postexposure use. MMWR 199039
Assoc 1995126122734. No. RR1.

Chunk 1816:
101.Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA, Gooch BF, et al. Percutaneous injuries in 117.CDC. Notice to readers update provisional Public Health Service rec

Chunk 1817:
dentistry an observational study. J Am Dent Assoc 199512674551. ommendations for chemoprophylaxis after occupational exposure to

Chunk 1818:
102.RamosGomez F, Ellison J, Greenspan D, Bird W, Lowe S, Gerberding HIV. MMWR 19964546872.

Chunk 1819:
JL. Accidental exposures to blood and body fluids among health care 118.CDC. Public Health Service guidelines for the management of health

Chunk 1820:
workers in dental teaching clinics a prospective study. J Am Dent Assoc care worker exposures to HIV and recommendations for postexposure
1997128125361. prophylaxis. MMWR 199847No. RR7.

Chunk 1821:
103.Cleveland JL, Gooch BF, Lockwood SA. Occupational blood exposure 119.CDC. Recommendations for prevention and control of hepatitis C

Chunk 1822:
in dentistry a decade in review. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997 virus HCV infection and HCVrelated chronic disease. MMWR
1871721. 199847No. RR19.

Chunk 1823:
104.Gooch BF, Siew C, Cleveland JL, Gruninger SE, Lockwood SA, Joy 120.Steere AC, Mallison GF. Handwashing practices for the prevention of

Chunk 1824:
ED. Occupational blood exposure and HIV infection among oral and nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 19758368390.

Chunk 1825:
maxillofacial surgeons. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 121.Garner JS. CDC guideline for prevention of surgical wound infec

Chunk 1826:
Endod 19988512834. tions, 1985. Supersedes guideline for prevention of surgical wound

Chunk 1827:
105.Gooch BF, Cardo DM, Marcus R, et al. Percutaneous exposures to infections published in 1982. Originally published in November

Chunk 1828:
HIVinfected blood among dental workers enrolled in the . Revised. Infect Control 19867193200.

Chunk 1829:
needlestick study. J Am Dent Assoc 1995126123742. 122.Larson EL. APIC guideline for hand washing and hand antisepsis in

Chunk 1830:
106.Younai FS, Murphy DC, Kotelchuck D. Occupational exposures to healthcare settings. Am J Infect Control 19952325169.

Chunk 1831:
blood in a dental teaching environment results of a tenyear surveil 123.CDC. Guideline for hand hygiene in healthcare settings recommen

Chunk 1832:
lance study. J Dent Educ 2001654368. dations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Com

Chunk 1833:
107.Carlton JE, Dodson TB, Cleveland JL, Lockwood SA. Percutaneous mittee and the HICPACSHEAAPICIDSA Hand Hygiene Task

Chunk 1834:
injuries during oral and maxillofacial surgery procedures. J Oral Force. MMWR 200251No. RR16.
Maxillofac Surg 1997555536. 124.Casewell M, Phillips I. Hands as route of transmission for Klebsiella

Chunk 1835:
108.Harte J, Davis R, Plamondon T, Richardson B. The influence of den species. Br Med J 1977213157.

Chunk 1836:
tal unit design on percutaneous injury. J Am Dent Assoc 1998 125.Larson EL, Early E, Cloonan P, Sugrue S, Parides M. An organiza

Chunk 1837:
129172531. tional climate intervention associated with increased handwashing and
decreased nosocomial infections. Behav Med 2000261422.
52 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1838:
126.Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al. Effectiveness of a hospital 147.Larson E, Killien M. Factors influencing handwashing behavior of

Chunk 1839:
wide programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene. Lancet patient care personnel. Am J Infect Control 198210939.

Chunk 1840:
2000356130712. 148.Zimakoff J, Kjelsberg AB, Larson SO, Holstein B. A multicenter ques

Chunk 1841:
127.Price PB. New studies in surgical bacteriology and surgical technique. tionnaire investigation of attitudes toward hand hygiene, assessed by

Chunk 1842:
JAMA 193811119936. the staff in fifteen hospitals in Denmark and Norway. Am J Infec Con
128.Dewar NE, Gravens DL. Effectiveness of septisol antiseptic foam as a trol 1992205864.

Chunk 1843:
surgical scrub agent. Appl Microbiol 1973265449. 149.Grohskopf LA, Roth VR, Feikin DR, et al. Serratia liquefaciens blood

Chunk 1844:
129.Lowbury EJ, Lilly HA. Disinfection of the hands of surgeons and nurses. stream infections from contamination of epoetin alfa at a hemodialy

Chunk 1845:
Br Med J 1960144550. sis center. N Engl J Med 200134414917.

Chunk 1846:
130.Rotter M. Hand washing and hand disinfection. In Mayhall CG, ed. 150.Archibald LK, Corl A, Shah B, et al. Serratia marcescens outbreak asso

Chunk 1847:
Hospital epidemiology and infection control. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA ciated with extrinsic contamination of 1 chlorxylenol soap. Infect

Chunk 1848:
Lippincott Williams Wilkins, 1999133955. Control Hosp Epidemiol 1997187049.

Chunk 1849:
131.Widmer AF. Replace hand washing with use of a waterless alcohol hand 151.Larson EL, Norton Hughes CA, Pyrak JD, Sparks SM, Cagatay EU,

Chunk 1850:
rub? Clin Infect Dis 20003113643. Bartkus JM. Changes in bacterial flora associated with skin damage on

Chunk 1851:
132.Larson EL, Butz AM, Gullette DL, Laughon BA. Alcohol for surgical hands of health care personnel. Am J Infect Control 19982651321.

Chunk 1852:
scrubbing? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 19901113943. 152.Ojajärvi J, Mäkelä P, Rantasalo I. Failure of hand disinfection with

Chunk 1853:
133.Faoagali J, Fong J, George N, Mahoney P, ORouke V. Comparison of frequent hand washing a need for prolonged field studies. J Hyg Lond

Chunk 1854:
the immediate, residual, and cumulative antibacterial effects of 19777910719.

Chunk 1855:
Novaderm R, Novascrub R, Betadine Surgical Scrub, Hibiclens, and 153.Berndt U, WiggerAlberti W, Gabard B, Elsner P. Efficacy of a barrier

Chunk 1856:
liquid soap. Am J Infect Control 19952333743. cream and its vehicle as protective measures against occupational irri

Chunk 1857:
134.Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended prac tant contact dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 2000427780.

Chunk 1858:
tices for sterilization in the practice setting. In Fogg D, Parker N, 154.McCormick RD, Buchman TL, Maki DG. Doubleblind, randomized

Chunk 1859:
Shevlin D, eds. 2002 standards, recommended practices, and guide trial of scheduled use of a novel barrier cream and an oilcontaining

Chunk 1860:
lines. Denver, CO AORN, 200233342. lotion for protecting the hands of health care workers. Am J Infect
135.US Department Of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Control 20002830210.

Chunk 1861:
Administration. Tentative final monograph for healthcare antiseptic 155.Larson E, Anderson JK, Baxendale L, Bobo L. Effects of a protective

Chunk 1862:
drug products proposed rule. Federal Register 1994593144152. foam on scrubbing and gloving. Am J Infect Control 199321297301.

Chunk 1863:
136.Larson E. A causal link between handwashing and risk of infection? 156.McGinley KJ, Larson EL, Leyden JJ. Composition and density of

Chunk 1864:
Examination of the evidence. Infection Control.198892836. microflora in the subungual space of the hand. J Clin Microbiol

Chunk 1865:
137.Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR, Hospital 1988269503.

Chunk 1866:
Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guideline for pre 157Pottinger J, Burns S, Manske C. Bacterial carriage by artificial versus

Chunk 1867:
vention of surgical site infection, 1999. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol natural nails. Am J Infect Control 1989173404.

Chunk 1868:
19992025078. 158.McNeil SA, Foster CL, Hedderwick SA, Kauffman CA. Effect of hand

Chunk 1869:
138.Doebbeling BN, Pfaller MA, Houston AK, Wenzel RP. Removal of cleansing with antimicrobial soap or alcoholbased gel on microbial

Chunk 1870:
nosocomial pathogens from the contaminated glove. Ann Intern Med colonization of artificial fingernails worn by health care workers. Clin
19881093948. Infect Dis 20013236772.

Chunk 1871:
139.Kabara JJ, Brady MB. Contamination of bar soaps under inuse con 159.Rubin DM. Prosthetic fingernails in the OR a research study. AORN

Chunk 1872:
ditions. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 19845114. J 1988479445.

Chunk 1873:
140.Ojajärvi J. The importance of soap selection for routine hand hygiene 160.Hedderwick SA, McNeil SA, Lyons MJ, Kauffman CA. Pathogenic

Chunk 1874:
in hospital. J Hyg Lond 19818627583. organisms associated with artificial fingernails worn by healthcare work

Chunk 1875:
141.Larson E, Leyden JJ, McGinley KJ, Grove GL, Talbot GH. Physiologic ers. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2000215059.

Chunk 1876:
and microbiologic changes in skin related to frequent handwashing. 161.Passaro DJ, Waring L, Armstrong R, et al. Postoperative Serratia marcescens

Chunk 1877:
Infect Control 198675963. wound infections traced to an outofhospital source. J Infect Dis
142.Larson E. Handwashing its essentialeven when you use gloves. Am 19971759925.

Chunk 1878:
J Nurs 1989899349. 162.Foca M, Jakob K, Whittier S, et al. Endemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Chunk 1879:
143.Field EA, McGowan P, Pearce PK, Martin MV. Rings and watches infection in a neonatal intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2000

Chunk 1880:
should they be removed prior to operative dental procedures? J Dent 343695700.
199624659. 163.Parry MF, Grant B, Yukna M, et al. Candida osteomyelitis and diskitis

Chunk 1881:
144.Hobson DW, Woller W, Anderson L, Guthery E. Development and after spinal surgery an outbreak that implicates artificial nail use. Clin

Chunk 1882:
evaluation of a new alcoholbased surgical hand scrub formulation with Infect Dis 2001323527.

Chunk 1883:
persistent antimicrobial characteristics and brushless application. Am 164.Moolenaar RL, Crutcher M, San Joaquin VH, et al. A prolonged out

Chunk 1884:
J Infect Control 19982650712. break of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a neonatal intensive care unit did

Chunk 1885:
145.Mulberry G, Snyder AT, Heilman J, Pyrek J, Stahl J. Evaluation of a staff fingernails play a role in disease transmission? Infect Control Hosp

Chunk 1886:
waterless, scrubless chlorhexidine gluconateethanol surgical scrub for Epidemiol 200021805.

Chunk 1887:
antimicrobial efficacy. Am J Infect Control 20012937782. 165.Baumgardner CA, Maragos CS, Walz J, Larson E. Effects of nail polish

Chunk 1888:
146.Association of Perioperative Registered Nurses. Recommended prac on microbial growth of fingernails dispelling sacred cows. AORN J

Chunk 1889:
tices for surgical hand scrubs. In Fogg D, Parker N, eds. 2003 stan 199358848.
dards, recommended practices, and guidelines. Denver, CO AORN,
Inc., 200327780.

Chunk 1890:
Inc., 200327780.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 53
166.Wynd CA, Samstag DE, Lapp AM. Bacterial carriage on the finger 185.Avery CM, Hjort A, Walsh S, Johnson PA. Glove perforation during

Chunk 1891:
nails of OR nurses. AORN J 199460796, 799805. surgical extraction of wisdom teeth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol

Chunk 1892:
167.Lowbury EJ. Aseptic methods in the operating suite. Lancet Oral Radiol Endod 199886235.
196817059. 186.Otis LL, Cottone JA. Prevalence of perforations in disposable latex

Chunk 1893:
168.Hoffman PN, Cooke EM, McCarville MR, Emmerson AM. Micro gloves during routine dental treatment. J Am Dent Assoc 1989
organisms isolated from skin under wedding rings worn by hospital 1183214.

Chunk 1894:
staff. Br Med J 19852902067. 187.Kotilainen HR, Brinker JP, Avato JL, Gantz NM. Latex and vinyl

Chunk 1895:
169.Jacobson G, Thiele JE, McCune JH, Farrell LD. Handwashing ring examination gloves. Quality control procedures and implications for

Chunk 1896:
wearing and number of microorganisms. Nurs Res 1985341868. health care workers. Arch Intern Med 1989149274953.

Chunk 1897:
170.Trick WE, Vernon MO, Hayes RA, et al. Impact of ring wearing on 188.Food and Drug Administration. Glove powder report. Rockville, MD

Chunk 1898:
hand contamination and comparison of hand hygiene agents in a hos US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug

Chunk 1899:
pital. Clin Infect Dis 2003 36138390. Administration, 1997. Available at httpwww.fda.govcdrhglvpwd.html.

Chunk 1900:
171.Salisbury DM, Hutfilz P, Treen LM, Bollin GE, Gautam S. The effect 189.Morgan DJ, Adams D. Permeability studies on protective gloves used

Chunk 1901:
of rings on microbial load of health care workers hands. Am J Infec in dental practice. Br Dent J 1989166113.
Control 199725247. 190.Albin MS, Bunegin L, Duke ES, Ritter RR, Page CP. Anatomy of a

Chunk 1902:
172.Cochran MA, Miller CH, Sheldrake MS. The efficacy of the rubber defective barrier sequential glove leak detection in a surgical and den

Chunk 1903:
dam as a barrier to the spread of microorganisms during dental treat tal environment. Crit Care Med 19922017084.

Chunk 1904:
ment. J Am Dent Assoc 19891191414. 191.Merchant VA, Molinari JA, Pickett T. Microbial penetration of gloves

Chunk 1905:
173.Miller CH, Palenik DJ. Aseptic techniques Chapter 10. In Miller following usage in routine dental procedures. Am J Dent 19925956.

Chunk 1906:
CH, Palenik DJ, eds. Infection control and management of hazardous 192.Pitten FA, Herdemann G, Kramer A. The integrity of latex gloves in

Chunk 1907:
materials for the dental team. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO Mosby, 1998. clinical dental practice. Infection 20002838892.

Chunk 1908:
174.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. TB res 193.Jamal A, Wilkinson S. The mechanical and microbiological integrity

Chunk 1909:
piratory protection program in health care facilities administrators of surgical gloves. ANZ J Surg 2003731403.

Chunk 1910:
guide. Cincinnati, OH US Department of Health and Human Ser 194.Korniewicz DM, ElMasri MM, Broyles JM, Martin CD, OConnell

Chunk 1911:
vices, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational KP. A laboratorybased study to assess the performance of surgical gloves.

Chunk 1912:
Safety and Health, 1999. DHHS publication no. NIOSH 99143. AORN J 2003777729.

Chunk 1913:
175.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis 195.Schwimmer A, Massoumi M, Barr CE. Efficacy of double gloving to

Chunk 1914:
tration. OSHA 29 CFR 1910.139. Respiratory protection for prevent inner glove perforation during outpatient oral surgical proce

Chunk 1915:
M. tuberculosis. Federal Register 1998494429. dures. J Am Dent Assoc 19941251968.

Chunk 1916:
176.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH 196.Patton LL, Campbell TL, Evers SP. Prevalence of glove perforations dur

Chunk 1917:
guide to the selection and use of particulate respirators certified under ing doublegloving for dental procedures. Gen Dent 199543226.

Chunk 1918:
42 CFR 84. Cincinnati, OH US Department of Health and Human 197.Gerberding JL, Littell C, Tarkington A, Brown A, Schecter WP. Risk

Chunk 1919:
Services, Public Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupa of exposure of surgical personnel to patients blood during surgery at

Chunk 1920:
tional Safety and Health, 1996. DHHS publication no. NIOSH 96 San Francisco General Hospital. N Engl J Med 1990322178893.

Chunk 1921:
101. 198.Klein RC, Party E, Gershey EL. Virus penetration of examination gloves.
177.DeGrootKosolcharoen J, Jones JM. Permeability of latex and vinyl Biotechniques 199091969.

Chunk 1922:
gloves to water and blood. Am J Infect Control 198917196201. 199.Mellstrom GA, Lindberg M, Boman A. Permeation and destructive

Chunk 1923:
178.Korniewicz DM, Laughon BE, Butz A, Larson E. Integrity of vinyl effects of disinfectants on protective gloves. Contact Dermatitis
and latex procedure gloves. Nurs Res 1989381446. 19922616370.

Chunk 1924:
179.Olsen RJ, Lynch P, Coyle MB, Cummings J, Bokete T, Stamm WE. 200.Jordan SL, Stowers MF, Trawick EG, Theis AB. Glutaraldehyde perme

Chunk 1925:
Examination gloves as barriers to hand contamination in clinical prac ation choosing the proper glove. Am J Infect Control 199624679.

Chunk 1926:
tice. JAMA 19932703503. 201.Cappuccio WR, Lees PS, Breysse PN, Margolick JB. Evaluation of

Chunk 1927:
180.Murray CA, Burke FJ, McHugh S. An assessment of the incidence of integrity of gloves used in a flow cytometry laboratory. Infect Control

Chunk 1928:
punctures in latex and nonlatex dental examination gloves in routine Hosp Epidemiol 1997184235.

Chunk 1929:
clinical practice. Br Dent J 200119037780. 202.Monticello MV, Gaber DJ. Glove resistance to permeation by a 7.5

Chunk 1930:
181.Burke FJ, Baggett FJ, Lomax AM. Assessment of the risk of glove punc hydrogen peroxide sterilizing and disinfecting solution. Am J Infec

Chunk 1931:
ture during oral surgery procedures. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Control 1999273646.
Oral Radiol Endod 1996821821. 203.Baumann MA, Rath B, Fischer JH, Iffland R. The permeability of

Chunk 1932:
182.Burke FJ, Wilson NH. The incidence of undiagnosed punctures in dental procedure and examination gloves by an alcohol based disinfec

Chunk 1933:
nonsterile gloves. Br Dent J 19901686771. tant. Dent Mater 20001613944.

Chunk 1934:
183.Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H. Perforation and 204.Ready MA, Schuster GS, Wilson JT, Hanes CM. Effects of dental

Chunk 1935:
proteinaceous contamination of dental gloves during prosthodontic medicaments on examination glove permeability. J Prosthet Dent
treatments. Int J Prosthodont 1994755966. 198961499503.

Chunk 1936:
184.Nikawa H, Hamada T, Tamamoto M, Abekura H, Murata H. Perfora 205.Richards JM, Sydiskis RJ, Davidson WM, Josell SD, Lavine DS. Per

Chunk 1937:
tion of dental gloves during prosthodontic treatments as assessed by meability of latex gloves after contact with dental materials. Am

Chunk 1938:
the conductivity and water inflation tests. Int J Prosthodont J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 19931042249.
199693626.
54 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 1939:
206.Andersson T, Bruze M, Bjorkner B. In vivo testing of the protection of 227.Siew C, Hamann C, Gruninger SE, Rodgers P, Sullivan KM. 2003.Type

Chunk 1940:
gloves against acrylates in dentinbonding systems on patients with known I Latex Allergic Reactions among Dental Professionals, 19962001.

Chunk 1941:
contact allergy to acrylates. Contact Dermatitis 1999412549. Journal of Dental Research, 82 Special Issue 1718.

Chunk 1942:
207.Reitz CD, Clark NP. The setting of vinyl polysiloxane and condensa 228.Saary MJ, Kanani A, Alghadeer H, Holness DL, Tarlo SM. Changes in

Chunk 1943:
tion silicone putties when mixed with gloved hands. J Am Dent Assoc rates of natural rubber latex sensitivity among dental school students

Chunk 1944:
19881163715. and staff members after changes in latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol
208.Kahn RL, Donovan TE, Chee WW. Interaction of gloves and rubber 20021091315.

Chunk 1945:
dam with a poly vinyl siloxane impression material a screening test. 229.Hunt LW, Kelkar P, Reed CE, Yunginger JW. Management of occupa

Chunk 1946:
Int J Prosthodont 198923426. tional allergy to natural rubber latex in a medical center the impor

Chunk 1947:
209.Matis BA, Valadez D, Valadez E. The effect of the use of dental gloves tance of quantitative latex allergen measurement and objective

Chunk 1948:
on mixing vinyl polysiloxane putties. J Prosthodont 1997618992. followup. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002 110suppl 2S96106.

Chunk 1949:
210.Wright JG, McGeer AJ, Chyatte D, Ransohoff DF. Mechanisms of 230.Turjanmaa K, Kanto M, Kautiainen H, Reunala T, Palosuo T. Long

Chunk 1950:
glove tears and sharp injuries among surgical personnel. JAMA term outcome of 160 adult patients with natural rubber latex allergy.
1991266166871. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002 110suppl 2S704.

Chunk 1951:
211.Dodds RD, Guy PJ, Peacock AM, Duffy SR, Barker SG, Thomas MH. 231.Heilman DK, Jones RT, Swanson MC, Yunginger JW. A prospective,

Chunk 1952:
Surgical glove perforation. Br J Surg 1988759668. controlled study showing that rubber gloves are the major contributor

Chunk 1953:
212.Adams D, Bagg J, Limaye M, Parsons K, Absi EG. A clinical evalua to latex aeroallergen levels in the operating room. J Allergy Clin

Chunk 1954:
tion of glove washing and reuse in dental practice. J Hosp Infect Immunol 19969832530.
19922015362. 232.Baur X, Jager D. Airborne antigens from latex gloves. Lancet 1990

Chunk 1955:
213.Martin MV, Dunn HM, Field EA, et al. A physical and microbiological 335912.

Chunk 1956:
evaluation of the reuse of nonsterile gloves. Br Dent J 19881653214. 233.Turjanmaa K, Reunala T, Alenius H, BrummerKorvenkontio H,

Chunk 1957:
214.US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Palosuo T. Allergens in latex surgical gloves and glove powder. Lancet

Chunk 1958:
Administration. 21 CFR Part 800. Medical devices patient examina 19903361588.

Chunk 1959:
tion and surgeons gloves. Adulteration, final rule. Federal Register 234.Baur X, Chen Z, Allmers H. Can a threshold limit value for natural

Chunk 1960:
199055512548. rubber latex airborne allergens be defined? J Allergy Clin Immunol
215.Giglio JA, Roland RW, Laskin DM, Grenevicki L. The use of sterile 1998101247.

Chunk 1961:
versus nonsterile gloves during outpatient exodontia. Quintessence 235.Trape M, Schenck P, Warren A. Latex gloves use and symptoms in

Chunk 1962:
Int 1993245435. health care workers 1 year after implementaion of a policy restricting

Chunk 1963:
216.Cheung LK, Chow LK, Tsang MH, Tung LK. An evaluation of com the use of powdered gloves. Am J Infec Control 2000283528.

Chunk 1964:
plications following dental extractions using either sterile or clean gloves. 236.Allmers H, Brehler R, Chen Z, RaulfHeimsoth M, Fels H, Baur X.

Chunk 1965:
Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2001305504. Reduction of latex aeroallergens and latexspecific IgE antibodies in

Chunk 1966:
217.Gani JS, Anseline PF, Bissett RL. Efficacy of double versus single glov sensitized workers after removal of powdered natural rubber latex gloves

Chunk 1967:
ing in protecting the operating team. Aust N Z J Surg 1990601715. in a hospital. Allergy Clin Immunol 19981028416.

Chunk 1968:
218.Short LJ, Bell DM. Risk of occupational infection with bloodborne 237.Tarlo SM, Sussman G, Contala A, Swanson MC. Control of airborne

Chunk 1969:
pathogens in operating and delivery room settings. Am J Infect Con latex by use of powderfree latex gloves. J Allergy Clin Immunol
trol 19932134350. 1994939859.

Chunk 1970:
219.Tokars JI, Culver DH, Mendelson MH, et al. Skin and mucous mem 238.Swanson MC, Bubak ME, Hunt LW, Yunginger JW, Warner MA, Reed

Chunk 1971:
brane contacts with blood during surgical procedures risk and preven CE. Quantification of occupational latex aeroallergens in a medical

Chunk 1972:
tion. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 19951670311. center. J Allergy Clin Immunol 199494445551.

Chunk 1973:
220.Tanner J, Parkinson H. Double gloving to reduce surgical cross 239.Hermesch CB, Spackman GK, Dodge WW, Salazar A. Effect of

Chunk 1974:
infection Cochrane Review. The Cochrane Library 2003Issue 2132. powderfree latex examination glove use on airborne powder levels in a

Chunk 1975:
221.Webb JM, Pentlow BD. Double gloving and surgical technique. Ann dental school clinic. J Dent Educ 19996381420.

Chunk 1976:
R Coll Surg Engl 1993752912. 240.Miller CH. Infection control strategies for the dental office Chapter

Chunk 1977:
222.Watts D, Tassler PL, Dellon AL. The effect of double gloving on cuta 29. In Ciancio SG, ed. ADA guide to dental therapeutics. 2nd ed.

Chunk 1978:
neous sensibility, skin compliance and suture identification. Contemp Chicago, IL ADA Publishing, 200054358.
Surg 19944428992. 241.Primeau MN, Adkinson NF Jr, Hamilton RG. Natural rubber phar

Chunk 1979:
223.Wilson SJ, Sellu D, Uy A, Jaffer MA. Subjective effects of double gloves maceutical vial closures release latex allergens that produce skin reac

Chunk 1980:
on surgical performance. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 199678202. tions. J Allergy Clin Immunol 200110795862.

Chunk 1981:
224.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA 242.Spaulding EH. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical materi

Chunk 1982:
medical glove guidance manual Draft guidance. Rockville, MD als Chapter 32. In Lawrence CA, Block SS, eds. Disinfection, steril

Chunk 1983:
US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug ization and preservation. Philadelphia, PA Lea Febiger, 1968
Administration, 1999. Available at httpwww.fda.govcdrhdsma 51731.

Chunk 1984:
135.html_Toc458914315. 243.CDC. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization in healthcare facili

Chunk 1985:
225.Dillard SF, Hefflin B, Kaczmarek RG, Petsonk EL, Gross TP. Health ties recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control

Chunk 1986:
effects associated with medical glove use. AORN J 2002768896. Practices Advisory Committee HICPAC. MMWR in press.

Chunk 1987:
226.Hamann CP, Turjanmaa K, Rietschel R, et al. Natural rubber latex 244.CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in healthcare

Chunk 1988:
hypersensitivity incidence and prevalence of type I allergy in the den facilities recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection

Chunk 1989:
tal professional. J Am Dent Assoc 19981294354. Control Practices Advisory Committee HICPAC. MMWR
200352No. RR10.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 55

Chunk 1990:
245.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Parts 152, 156, and 260.Miller CH, Palenik CJ. Sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis in den

Chunk 1991:
158. Exemption of certain pesticide substances from federal insecti tistry Chapter 53. In Block SS, ed. 5th ed. Disinfection, steriliza

Chunk 1992:
cide, fungicide, and rodenticide act requirements. Amended 1996. tion, and preservation. Philadelphia, PA Lippincott Williams 
Federal Register 19966188769. Wilkins, 2001104968.

Chunk 1993:
246.Food and Drug Administration. Dental handpiece sterilization Let 261.Joslyn LJ. Sterilization by heat Chapter 36. In Block SS, ed. 5th ed.

Chunk 1994:
ter. Rockville, MD US Department of Health and Human Services, Disinfection, sterilization, and preservation. Philadelphia, PA

Chunk 1995:
Food and Drug Administration, 1992. Lippincott Williams Wilkins, 2001695728.

Chunk 1996:
247.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri 262.Rutala WA, Weber DJ, Chappell KJ. Patient injury from flash

Chunk 1997:
can National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility sterilized instruments. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 199920458.

Chunk 1998:
assurance in health care facilities. ANSIAAMI ST462002. Arling 263.Bond WW. Biological indicators for a liquid chemical sterilizer a solu

Chunk 1999:
ton, VA Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumenta tion to the instrument reprocessing problem? Infect Control Hosp
tion, 2002. Epidemiol 19931430912.

Chunk 2000:
248.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri 264.Stingeni L, Lapomarda V, Lisi P. Occupational hand dermatitis in hos

Chunk 2001:
can National Standards Institute. Steam sterilization and sterility pital environments. Contact Dermatitis 1995331726.

Chunk 2002:
assurance using tabletop sterilizers in officebased, ambulatorycare 265.Ashdown BC, Stricof DD, May ML, Sherman SJ, Carmody RF.

Chunk 2003:
medical, surgical, and dental facilities. ANSIAAMI ST401998. Hydrogen peroxide poisoning causing brain infarction neuroimaging

Chunk 2004:
Arlington, VA Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru findings. Am J Roentgenol 199817016535.
mentation, 1998. 266.Ballantyne B. Toxicology of glutaraldehyde review of studies and

Chunk 2005:
249.Favero MS, Bond WW. Chemical disinfection of medical and surgical human health effects. Danbury, CT Union Carbide, 1995.

Chunk 2006:
material Chapter 43. In Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization and 267.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Glut

Chunk 2007:
preservation. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA Lippincott Williams Wilkins, araldehyde occupational hazards in hospitals. Cincinnati, OH US

Chunk 2008:
2001881917. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,

Chunk 2009:
250.Parker HH 4th, Johnson RB. Effectiveness of ethylene oxide for steril CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2001.

Chunk 2010:
ization of dental handpieces. J Dent 1995231135. DHHS publication no. NIOSH 2001115.

Chunk 2011:
251.Alfa MJ, Olson N, Degagne P, Hizon R. New low temperature steril 268CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports symptoms of irritation asso

Chunk 2012:
ization technologies microbicidal activity and clinical efficacy Chap ciated with exposure to glutaraldehydeColorado. MMWR

Chunk 2013:
ter 9. In Rutala WA, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in 1987361901.

Chunk 2014:
healthcare. Champlain, NY Polyscience Publications, 19986778. 269.Lehman PA, Franz TJ, Guin JD. Penetration of glutaraldehyde through

Chunk 2015:
252.Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Clinical effectiveness of lowtemperature glove material tactylon versus natural rubber latex. Contact Dermati

Chunk 2016:
sterilization technologies. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998 tis 1994301767.
19798804. 270.Hamann CP, Rodgers PA, Sullivan K. Allergic contact dermatitis in

Chunk 2017:
253.Miller CH, Tan CM, Beiswanger MA, Gaines DJ, Setcos JC, Palenik dental professionals effective diagnosis and treatment. J Am Dent Assoc

Chunk 2018:
CJ. Cleaning dental instruments measuring the effectiveness of an 200313418594.

Chunk 2019:
instrument washerdisinfector. Am J Dent 2000133943. 271.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri

Chunk 2020:
254.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Chemi can National Standards Institute. Safe use and handling of glutaralde

Chunk 2021:
cal indicatorsguidance for the selection, use, and interpretation of hydebased products in health care facilities. ANSIAAMI ST581996.

Chunk 2022:
results. AAMI Technical Information Report No. 25. Arlington, VA Arlington, VA Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru

Chunk 2023:
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1999. mentation, 1996.

Chunk 2024:
255.Ninemeier J. Central service technical manual. 5th ed. Chicago, IL 272.Fisher AA. Ethylene oxide dermatitis. Cutis 19843420, 22, 24.

Chunk 2025:
International Association of Healthcare Central Service Materiel Man 273.Jay WM, Swift TR, Hull DS. Possible relationship of ethylene oxide

Chunk 2026:
agement, 1998. exposure to cataract formation. Am J Ophthalmol 19829372732.

Chunk 2027:
256.Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Choosing a sterilization wrap for surgical packs. 274.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis

Chunk 2028:
Infection Control Today 2000464,70. tration. Review of the ethylene oxide standard. Federal Register
257.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri 200065351278.

Chunk 2029:
can National Standards Institute. Good hospital practice steam steril 275.Pratt LH, Smith DG, Thornton RH, Simmons JB, Depta BB, Johnson

Chunk 2030:
ization and sterility assurance. ANSIAAMI ST461993. Arlington, VA RB. The effectiveness of two sterilization methods when different

Chunk 2031:
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 1993. precleaning techniques are employed. J Dent 1999272478.

Chunk 2032:
258.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri 276.US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug

Chunk 2033:
can National Standards Institute. Flash sterilization steam steriliza Administration. 21 CFR Part 872.6730. Dental devices endodontic

Chunk 2034:
tion of patient care items for immediate use. ANSIAAMI ST371996. dry heat sterilizer final rule. Federal Register 1997622903.

Chunk 2035:
Arlington, VA Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru 277.Favero MS. Current issues in hospital hygiene and sterilization tech

Chunk 2036:
mentation, 1996. nology. J Infect Control Asia Pacific Edition 19981810.

Chunk 2037:
259.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri 278.Greene WW. Control of sterilization process Chapter 22. In Russell

Chunk 2038:
can National Standards Institute. Ethylene oxide sterilization in health AD, Hugo WB, Ayliffe GA, eds. Principles and practice of disinfec

Chunk 2039:
care facilities safety and effectiveness. ANSIAAMI ST411999. tion, preservation, and sterilization. Oxford, England Blackwell Sci

Chunk 2040:
Arlington, VA Association for the Advancement of Medical Instru entific Publications, 199260524.
mentation, 1999.
56 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 2041:
279.Favero MS. Developing indicators for sterilization Chapter 13. In 300.Greene R, State and Territorial Association on Alternate Treatment

Chunk 2042:
Rutala W, ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and antisepsis in health care. Technologies. Technical assistance manual state regulatory oversight

Chunk 2043:
Washington, DC Association for Professionals in Infection Control of medical waste treatment technologies. 2nd ed. Washington, DC

Chunk 2044:
and Epidemiology, Inc., 199811932. US Environmental Protection Agency, 1994. Available at httpwww.

Chunk 2045:
280.Maki DG, Hassemer CA. Flash sterilization carefully measured haste. epa.govepaoswerothermedicalmwpdfsta1.pdf.

Chunk 2046:
Infect Control 1987830710. 301.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Part 60. Standards of

Chunk 2047:
281.Andres MT, Tejerina JM, Fierro JF. Reliability of biologic indicators in performance for new stationary sources and emission guidelines for

Chunk 2048:
a mailreturn sterilizationmonitoring service a review of 3 years. existing sources hospitalmedicalinfectious waste incinerators final

Chunk 2049:
Quintessence Int 19952686570. rule. Federal Register 1997624834791.

Chunk 2050:
282.Miller CH, Sheldrake MA. The ability of biological indicators to 302.Slade JS, Pike EB, Eglin RP, Colbourne JS, Kurtz JB. The survival of

Chunk 2051:
detect sterilization failures. Am J Dent 19947957. human immunodeficiency virus in water, sewage, and sea water. Water

Chunk 2052:
283.Association of Operating Room Nurses. AORN standards and recom Sci Tech 198921559.

Chunk 2053:
mended practices for perioperative nursing. Denver, CO AORN, 1987. 303.Walker JT, Bradshaw DJ, Bennett AM, Fulford MR, Martin MV, Marsh

Chunk 2054:
284.Mayworm D. Sterile shelf life and expiration dating. J Hosp Supply PD. Microbial biofilm formation and contamination of dentalunit

Chunk 2055:
Process Distrib 19842325. water systems in general dental practice. Appl Environ Microbiol
285.Cardo DM, Sehulster LM. Central sterile supply Chapter 65. In 20006633637.

Chunk 2056:
Mayhall CG, ed. Hospital Epidemiology and Infection Control. 2nd 304.SchulzeRobbecke R, Feldmann C, Fischeder R, Janning B, Exner M,

Chunk 2057:
ed. Philadelphia, PA Lippincott Williams Wilkins, 1999102330. Wahl G. Dental units an environmental study of sources of poten

Chunk 2058:
286.Maki DG, Alvarado CJ, Hassemer CA, Zilz MA. Relation of the tially pathogenic mycobacteria. Tuber Lung Dis 19957631823.

Chunk 2059:
inanimate hospital environment to endemic nosocomial infection. 305.Barbeau J, Tanguay R, Faucher E, et al. Multiparametric analysis of

Chunk 2060:
N Engl J Med 198230715626. waterline contamination in dental units. Appl Environ Microbiol
287.Danforth D, Nicolle LE, Hume K, Alfieri N, Sims H. Nosocomial 19966239549.

Chunk 2061:
infections on nursing units with floors cleaned with a disinfectant com 306.Atlas RM, Williams JF, Huntington MK. Legionella contamination of

Chunk 2062:
pared with detergent. J Hosp Infect 19871022935. dentalunit waters. Appl Environ Microbiol 199561120813.

Chunk 2063:
288.Crawford JJ. Clinical asepsis in dentistry. Mesquite, TX Oral Medi 307.Kelstrup J, FunderNielsen T, Theilade J. Microbial aggregate contami

Chunk 2064:
cine Press, 1987. nation of water lines in dental equipment and its control. Acta Pathol
289.Food and Drug Administration. Design control guidance for medical Microbiol Scand B 19778517783.

Chunk 2065:
device manufacturers. Rockville, MD US Department of Health and 308.Challacombe SJ, Fernandes LL. Detecting Legionella pneumophila in

Chunk 2066:
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1997. water systems a comparison of various dental units. J Am Dent Assoc

Chunk 2067:
290.Fauerbach LL, Janelle JW. Practical applications in infection control 19951266038.

Chunk 2068:
Chapter 45. In Block SS, ed. 5th ed. Disinfection, sterilization, and 309.Mayo JA, Oertling KM, Andrieu SC. Bacterial biofilm a source of con

Chunk 2069:
preservation. Philadelphia, PA Lippincott Williams Wilkins, tamination in dental airwater syringes. Clin Prev Dent 1990121320.

Chunk 2070:
200193544. 310.Scheid RC, Kim CK, Bright JS, Whitely MS, Rosen S. Reduction of

Chunk 2071:
291.Martin LS, McDougal JS, Loskoski SL. Disinfection and inactivation microbes in handpieces by flushing before use. J Am Dent Assoc

Chunk 2072:
of the human T lymphotrophic virus type IIIlymphadenopathy 198210565860.
associated virus. J Infect Dis 19851524003. 311.Bagga BS, Murphy RA, Anderson AW, Punwani I. Contamination of

Chunk 2073:
292.Bloomfield SF, SmithBurchnell CA, Dalgleish AG. Evaluation of dental unit cooling water with oral microorganisms and its preven

Chunk 2074:
hypochloritereleasing disinfectants against the human immunodefi tion. J Am Dent Assoc 19841097126.

Chunk 2075:
ciency virus HIV. J Hosp Infect 1990152738. 312.Martin MV. The significance of the bacterial contamination of dental

Chunk 2076:
293.Gerson SL, Parker P, Jacobs MR, Creger R, Lazarus HM. Aspergillosis unit water systems. Br Dent J 19871631524.

Chunk 2077:
due to carpet contamination. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 313.Pankhurst CL, PhilpottHoward JN, Hewitt JH, Casewell MW. The

Chunk 2078:
1994152213. efficacy of chlorination and filtration in the control and eradication of

Chunk 2079:
294.Suzuki A, Namba Y, Matsuura M, Horisawa A. Bacterial contamina Legionella from dental chair water systems. J Hosp Infect 199016918.

Chunk 2080:
tion of floors and other surfaces in operating rooms a fiveyear survey. 314.Mills SE, Lauderdale PW, Mayhew RB. Reduction of microbial con

Chunk 2081:
J Hyg Lond 19849355966. tamination in dental units with povidoneiodine 10. J Am Dent
295.Skoutelis AT, Westenfelder GO, Beckerdite M, Phair JP. Hospital car Assoc 19861132804.

Chunk 2082:
peting and epidemiology of Clostridium difficile. Am J Infect Control 315.Williams JF, Johnston AM, Johnson B, Huntington MK, Mackenzie

Chunk 2083:
1994222127. CD. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines prevalence,

Chunk 2084:
296.Rutala WA, Odette RL, Samsa GP. Management of infectious waste intensity and microbiological characteristics. J Am Dent Assoc
by US hospitals. JAMA 1989262163540. 19931245965.

Chunk 2085:
297.CDC. Perspectives in disease prevention and health promotion. Sum 316.Mills SE. The dental unit waterline controversy defusing the myths,

Chunk 2086:
mary of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry report defining the solutions. J Am Dent Assoc 2000131142741.

Chunk 2087:
to Congress the public health implications of medical waste. MMWR 317.Jones F, Bartlett CL. Infections associated with whirlpools and spas.
1990 398224. Soc Appl Bacteriol Symp Ser 19851461S6S.

Chunk 2088:
298.Palenik CJ. Managing regulated waste in dental environments. 318.Hollyoak V, Allison D, Summers J. Pseudomonas aeruginosa wound

Chunk 2089:
J Contemp Dent Pract 2003476. infection associated with a nursing homes whirlpool bath. Commun
299.Rutala WA, Mayhall CG. Medical waste. Infect Control Hosp Dis Rep CDR Rev 19955R1002.

Chunk 2090:
Edidemiol 1992133848.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 57

Chunk 2091:
319.Begg N, OMahony M, Penny P, Richardson EA, Basavaraj DS. Myco 338.Santiago JI. Microbial contamination of dental unit waterlines short

Chunk 2092:
bacterium chelonei associated with a hospital hydrotherapy pool. Com and long term effects of flushing. Gen Dent 19944252835.

Chunk 2093:
munity Med 1986834850. 339.Shearer BG. Biofilm and the dental office. J Am Dent Assoc 1996
320.Laussucq S, Baltch AL, Smith RP, et al. Nosocomial Mycobacterium 1271819.

Chunk 2094:
fortuitum colonization from a contaminated ice machine. Am Rev 340.Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, Ameri

Chunk 2095:
Respir Dis 19881388914. can National Standards Institute. Hemodialysis systems. ANSIAAMI

Chunk 2096:
321.Struelens MJ, Rost F, Deplano A, et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and RD51992. Arlington, VA Association for the Advancement of Medi

Chunk 2097:
Enterobacteriaceae bacteremia after biliary endoscopy an outbreak cal Instrumentation, 1993.

Chunk 2098:
investigation using DNA macrorestriction analysis. Am J Med 199395 341.US Environmental Protection Agency. National primary drinking water

Chunk 2099:
48998. regulations, 1999 list of contaminants. Washington DC US Envi

Chunk 2100:
322.Kuritsky JN, Bullen MG, Broome CV, Silcox VA, Good RC, Wallace RJ ronmental Protection Agency, 1999. Available at httpwww.epa.gov

Chunk 2101:
Jr. Sternal wound infections and endocarditis due to organisms of the safewatermcl.html.

Chunk 2102:
Mycobacterium fortuitum complex. Ann Intern Med 1983989389. 342.American Public Health Association, American Water Works Associa

Chunk 2103:
323.Bolan G, Reingold AL, Carson LA, et al. Infections with Mycobacte tion, Water Environment Foundation. In Eaton AD, Clesceri LS,

Chunk 2104:
rium chelonei in patients receiving dialysis and using processed Greenberg AE, eds. Standard methods for the examination of water

Chunk 2105:
hemodialyzers. J Infect Dis 198515210139. and wastewater. Washington, DC American Public Health Associa
324.Lessing MP, Walker MM. Fatal pulmonary infection due to Mycobac tion, 1999.

Chunk 2106:
terium fortuitum. J Clin Pathol 1993462712. 343.Williams HN, Johnson A, Kelley JI, et al. Bacterial contamination of

Chunk 2107:
325.Arnow PM, Chou T, Weil D, Shapiro EN, Kretzschmar C. Nosoco the water supply in newly installed dental units. Quintessence Int

Chunk 2108:
mial Legionnaires disease caused by aerosolized tap water from respi 1995263317.
ratory devices. J Infect Dis 19821464607. 344.Scheid RC, Rosen S, Beck FM. Reduction of CFUs in highspeed hand

Chunk 2109:
326.Breiman RF, Fields BS, Sanden GN, Volmer L, Meier A, Spika JS. piece water lines over time. Clin Prev Dent 199012912.

Chunk 2110:
Association of shower use with Legionnaires disease possible role of 345.Williams HN, Kelley J, Folineo D, Williams GC, Hawley CL, Sibiski

Chunk 2111:
amoebae. JAMA 199026329246. J. Assessing microbial contamination in clean water dental units and

Chunk 2112:
327.Garbe PL, Davis BJ, Weisfeld JS, et al. Nosocomial Legionnaires dis compliance with disinfection protocol. J Am Dent Assoc 1994125

Chunk 2113:
ease epidemiologic demonstration of cooling towers as a source. JAMA 120511.
19852545214. 346.CDC, Working Group on Waterborne Cryptosporidiosis.

Chunk 2114:
328.Fallon RJ, Rowbotham TJ. Microbiological investigations into an out Cryptosporidium and water a public health handbook. Atlanta, GA

Chunk 2115:
break of Pontiac fever due to Legionella micdadei associated with use of US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser
a whirlpool. J Clin Pathol 19904347983. vice, CDC, 1997.

Chunk 2116:
329.Rose CS, Martyny JW, Newman LS, et al. Lifeguard lung endemic 347.MacKenzie WR, Hoxie NJ, Proctor ME, et al. A massive outbreak in

Chunk 2117:
granulomatous pneumonitis in an indoor swimming pool. Am J Pub Milwaukee of cryptosporidium infection transmitted through the public
lic Health 19988817951800. water supply. N Engl J Med 19943311617.

Chunk 2118:
330.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports Legionnaires disease outbreak 348.Kaminski JC. Cryptosporidium and the public water supply. N Engl

Chunk 2119:
associated with a grocery store mist machineLouisiana, 1989. J Med 1994331152930.
MMWR 19903910810. 349.CDC. Assessing the public health threat associated with waterborne

Chunk 2120:
331.Jacobs RL, Thorner RE, Holcomb JR, Schwietz LA, Jacobs FO. cryptosporidiosis report of a workshop. MMWR 199544No. RR6.

Chunk 2121:
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by Cladosporium in an enclosed 350.CDC. Surveillance for waterbornedisease outbreaksUnited States,

Chunk 2122:
hottub area. Ann Intern Med 19861052046. 19931994. MMWR 199645No. SS1.

Chunk 2123:
332.Clark A. Bacterial colonization of dental units and the nasal flora of 351.Office of Water, US Environmental Protection Agency. Lead and cop

Chunk 2124:
dental personnel. Proc Roy Soc Med 197467126970. per rule summary of revisions. EPA 815R99020. Washington DC

Chunk 2125:
333.Fotos PG, Westfall HN, Snyder IS, Miller RW, Mutchler BM. Preva US Environmental Protection Agency, 2000.

Chunk 2126:
lence of Legionellaspecific IgG and IgM antibody in a dental clinic 352.US Environmental Protection Agency. 65 CFR Parts 141 and 142.

Chunk 2127:
population. J Dent Res 19856413825. National primary drinking water regulations for lead and copper, final

Chunk 2128:
334.Reinthaler FF, Mascher F, Stunzner D. Serological examinations for rule. Federal Register 200019492015.

Chunk 2129:
antibodies against Legionella species in dental personnel. J Dent Res 353.Gooch B, Marianos D, Ciesielski C, et al. Lack of evidence for patient

Chunk 2130:
1988679423. topatient transmission of HIV in a dental practice. J Am Dent Assoc
335.Putnins EE, Di Giovanni D, Bhullar AS. Dental unit waterline con 19931243844.

Chunk 2131:
tamination and its possible implications during periodontal surgery. 354.Crawford JJ, Broderius C. Control of crossinfection risks in the den

Chunk 2132:
J Periodontol 200172393400. tal operatory preventon of water retraction by bur cooling spray sys

Chunk 2133:
336.United States Pharmacopeial Convention. Sterile water for irrigation. tems. J Am Dent Assoc 19881166857.

Chunk 2134:
In United States Pharmacopeial Convention. United States pharma 355.Mills SE, Kuehne JC, Bradley DV Jr. Bacteriological analysis of high

Chunk 2135:
copeia and national formulary. USP 24NF 19. Rockville, MD United speed handpiece turbines. J Am Dent Assoc 19931245962.

Chunk 2136:
States Pharmacopeial Convention, 19971753. 356.Lewis DL, Arens M, Appleton SS, et al. Crosscontamination poten

Chunk 2137:
337.Milton DK, Wypij D, Kriebel D, Walters MD, Hammond SK, Evans tial with dental equipment. Lancet 199234012524.

Chunk 2138:
JS. Endotoxin exposureresponse in a fiberglass manufacturing facil 357.Lewis DL, Boe RK. Crossinfection risks associated with current pro

Chunk 2139:
ity. Am J Ind Med 199629313. cedures for using highspeed dental handpieces. J Clin Microbiol
1992304016.
58 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 2140:
358.Checchi L, Montebugnoli L, Samaritani S. Contamination of the tur 377.Green KA, Mustachi B, Schoer K, Moro D, Blend R, McGeer A.

Chunk 2141:
bine air chamber a risk of cross infection. J Clin Periodontol Gadoliniumbased MR contrast media potential for growth of micro

Chunk 2142:
19982560711. bial contaminants when single vials are used for multiple patients.
359.Epstein JB, Rea G, Sibau L, Sherlock CH, Le ND. Assessing viral Am J Roentgenol 199516566971.

Chunk 2143:
retention and elimination in rotary dental instruments. J Am Dent 378.American Society of Anesthesiologists. Recommendations for infec

Chunk 2144:
Assoc 19951268792. tion control for the practice of anesthesiology. 2nd ed. Park Ridge,

Chunk 2145:
360.Kolstad RA. How well does the chemiclave sterilize handpieces? J Am IL American Society of Anesthesiologists,1999.

Chunk 2146:
Dent Assoc 199812998591. 379.Henry B, PlanteJenkins C, Ostrowska K. An outbreak of Serratia

Chunk 2147:
361.Kuehne JS, Cohen ME, Monroe SB. Performance and durability of marcescens associated with the anesthetic agent propofol. Am J Infect

Chunk 2148:
autoclavable highspeed dental handpieces. NDRIPR 9203. Bethesda, Control 2001293125.
MD Naval Dental Research Institute, 1992. 380.Plott RT, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. Iatrogenic contamination of

Chunk 2149:
362.Andersen HK, Fiehn NE, Larsen T. Effect of steam sterilization inside multidose vials in simulated use. A reassessment of current patient

Chunk 2150:
the turbine chambers of dental turbines. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral injection technique. Arch Dermatol 199012614414.

Chunk 2151:
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1999871848. 381.Arrington ME, Gabbert KC, Mazgaj PW, Wolf MT. Multidose vial

Chunk 2152:
363.Leonard DL, Charlton DG. Performance of highspeed dental contamination in anesthesia. AANA J 1990584626.

Chunk 2153:
handpieces subjected to simulated clinical use and sterilization. J Am 382.CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infections

Chunk 2154:
Dent Assoc 1999130130111. among chronic hemodialysis patients. MMWR 200150No. RR5.

Chunk 2155:
364.Barbeau J, ten Bokum L, Gauthier C, Prevost AP. Crosscontamination 383.Food and Drug Administration. Labeling recommendations for single

Chunk 2156:
potential of saliva ejectors used in dentistry. J Hosp Infect 1998 use devices reprocessed by third parties and hospitals final guidance

Chunk 2157:
4030311. for industry and FDA. Rockville, MD US Department of Health and
365.Mann GL, Campbell TL, Crawford JJ. Backflow in lowvolume suc Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 2001.

Chunk 2158:
tion lines the impact of pressure changes. J Am Dent Assoc 384.Villasenor A, Hill SD, Seale NS. Comparison of two ultrasonic clean

Chunk 2159:
19961276115. ing units for deterioration of cutting edges and debris removal on den
366.Watson CM, Whitehouse RL. Possibility of crosscontamination tal burs. Pediatr Dent 19921432630.

Chunk 2160:
between dental patients by means of the saliva ejector. J Am Dent Assoc 385.Rapisarda E, Bonaccorso A, Tripi TR, Condorelli GG. Effect of steriliza

Chunk 2161:
19931247780. tion on the cutting efficiency of rotary nickeltitanium endodontic files.

Chunk 2162:
367.Glass BJ, Terezhalmy GT. Infection control in dental radiology Chapter Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1999883437.

Chunk 2163:
15. In Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Practical 386.Filho IB, Esberard RM, Leonardo R, del Rio CE. Microscopic evalua

Chunk 2164:
infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore. MD Williams tion of three endodontic files pre and postinstrumentation. J Endo
Wilkins, 199622938. dontics 1998244614.

Chunk 2165:
368.Haring JI, Jansen L. Infection control and the dental radiographer. In 387.Silvaggio J, Hicks ML. Effect of heat sterilization on the torsional prop

Chunk 2166:
Haring JI, Jansen L, eds. Dental radiography principles and techniques. erties of rotary nickeltitanium endodontic files. J Endodontics
Philadelphia, PA WB Saunders Co., 2000194204. 1997237314.

Chunk 2167:
369.Hignett M, Claman P. High rates of perforation are found in 388.Kazemi RB, Stenman E, Spangberg LS. The endodontic file is a dis

Chunk 2168:
endovaginal ultrasound probe covers before and after oocyte retrieval posable instrument. J Endodontics 1995214515.

Chunk 2169:
for in vitro fertilizationembryo transfer. J Assist Reprod Genet 389.Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial

Chunk 2170:
1995126069. endocarditis recommendations by the American Heart Association.
370.Fritz S, Hust MH, Ochs C, Gratwohl I, Staiger M, Braun B. Use of a JAMA 1990264291922.

Chunk 2171:
latex cover sheath for transesophageal echocardiography TEE instead 390.Pallasch TJ, Slots J. Antibiotic prophylaxis and the medically compro

Chunk 2172:
of regular disinfection of the echoscope? Clin Cardiol 19931673740. mised patient. Periodontology 2000 19961010738.

Chunk 2173:
371.Milki AA, Fisch JD. Vaginal ultrasound probe cover leakage implica 391.Litsky BY, Mascis JD, Litsky W. Use of an antimicrobial mouthwash

Chunk 2174:
tions for patient care. Fertil Steril 19986940911. to minimize the bacterial aerosol contamination generated by the high

Chunk 2175:
372.Storment JM, Monga M, Blanco JD. Ineffectiveness of latex condoms speed drill. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970292530.

Chunk 2176:
in preventing contamination of the transvaginal ultrasound transducer 392.Mohammed CI, Monserrate V. Preoperative oral rinsing as a means of

Chunk 2177:
head. South Med J 1997902068. reducing air contamination during use of air turbine handpieces. Oral
373.Amis S, Ruddy M, Kibbler CC, Economides DL, MacLean AB. Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1970292914.

Chunk 2178:
Assessment of condoms as probe covers for transvaginal sonography. 393.Wyler D, Miller RL, Micik RE. Efficacy of selfadministered preop

Chunk 2179:
J Clin Ultrasound 2000282958. erative oral hygiene procedures in reducing the concentration of bac

Chunk 2180:
374.Rooks VJ, Yancey MK, Elg SA, Brueske L. Comparison of probe sheaths teria in aerosols generated during dental procedures. J Dent Res

Chunk 2181:
for endovaginal sonography. Obstet Gynecol 199687279. 197150509.
375.Hokett SD, Honey JR, Ruiz F, Baisden MK, Hoen MM. Assessing the 394.Muir KF, Ross PW, MacPhee IT, Holbrook WP, Kowolik MJ. Reduc

Chunk 2182:
effectiveness of direct digital radiography barrier sheaths and finger tion of microbial contamination from ultrasonic scalers. Br Dent
cots. J Am Dent Assoc 20001314637. J 1978145768.

Chunk 2183:
376.ASHP Council on Professional Affairs. ASHP guidelines on quality 395.Fine DH, Mendieta C, Barnett ML, et al. Efficacy of preprocedural

Chunk 2184:
assurance for pharmacyprepared sterile products. Am J Health Syst rinsing with an antiseptic in reducing viable bacteria in dental aero
Pharm 200057115069. sols. J Periodontol 1992638214.

Chunk 2185:
396.Fine DH, Furgang D, Korik I, Olshan A, Barnett ML, Vincent JW.
Reduction of viable bacteria in dental aerosols by preprocedural rins
ing with an antiseptic mouthrinse. Am J Dent 1993621921.

Chunk 2186:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 59
397.Fine DH, Yip J, Furgang D, Barnett ML, Olshan AM, Vincent J. 416.Molinari J. Dental. In Association for Professionals in Infection Con

Chunk 2187:
Reducing bacteria in dental aerosols preprocedural use of an antisep trol and Epidemiology, Inc. APIC. APIC text of infection control

Chunk 2188:
tic mouth rinse. J Am Dent Assoc 1993124568. and epidemiology. Washington, DC Association for Professionals in

Chunk 2189:
398.Logothetis DD, MartinezWelles JM. Reducing bacterial aerosol con Infection Control and Epidemiology, Inc, 2002.

Chunk 2190:
tamination with a chlorhexidine gluconate prerinse. J Am Dent Assoc 417.Sofou A, Larsen T, Fiehn NE, Owall B. Contamination level of algi

Chunk 2191:
199512616349. nate impressions arriving at a dental laboratory. Clin Oral Invest
399.Klyn SL, Cummings DE, Richardson BW, Davis RD. Reduction of 200261615.

Chunk 2192:
bacteriacontaining spray produced during ultrasonic scaling. Gen Dent 418.McNeill MR, Coulter WA, Hussey DL. Disinfection of irreversible

Chunk 2193:
20014964852. hydrocolloid impressions a comparative study. Int J Prosthodont
400.Brown AR, Papasian CJ, Shultz P, Theisen FC, Shultz RE. Bacteremia 199255637.

Chunk 2194:
and intraoral suture removal can an antimicrobial rinse help? J Am 419.Gerhardt DE, Sydiskis RJ. Impression materials and virus. J Am Dent
Dent Assoc 1998129145561. Assoc 1991122514.

Chunk 2195:
401.Lockhart PB. An analysis of bacteremias during dental extractions. 420.Leung RL, Schonfeld SE. Gypsum casts as a potential source of micro

Chunk 2196:
A doubleblind, placebocontrolled study of chlorhexidine. Arch bial crosscontamination. J Prosthet Dent 1983492101.

Chunk 2197:
Intern Med 199615651320. 421.Huizing KL, Palenik CJ, Setcos JC, Sheldrake MA, Miller, CH. Method

Chunk 2198:
402.Dajani AS, Bisno AL, Chung KJ, et al. Prevention of bacterial of evaluating the antimicrobial abilities of disinfectantcontaining gyp

Chunk 2199:
endocarditis recommendations by the American Heart Association. sum products. QDT Yearbook 1994171726.
JAMA 199727717941801. 422.Verran J, Kossar S, McCord JF. Microbiological study of selected risk

Chunk 2200:
403.Tate WH, White RR. Disinfection of human teeth for educational areas in dental technology laboratories. J Dent 1996247780.

Chunk 2201:
purposes. J Dent Educ 1991555835. 423.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH

Chunk 2202:
404.Pantera EA Jr, Zambon JJ, ShihLevine M. Indirect immunofluores Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincin

Chunk 2203:
cence for the detection of Bacteroides species in human dental pulp. nati, OH US Department of Health and Human Services, Public

Chunk 2204:
J Endodontics 19881421823. Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
405.Pantera EA Jr, Schuster GS. Sterilization of extracted human teeth. Health, 1988. HETA 851361932.

Chunk 2205:
J Dent Educ 1990542835. 424.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. NIOSH

Chunk 2206:
406.Parsell DE, Stewart BM, Barker JR, Nick TG, Karns L, Johnson RB. Health Hazard Evaluation and Technical Assistance Report. Cincin

Chunk 2207:
The effect of steam sterilization on the physical properties and per nati, OH US Department of Health and Human Services, Public

Chunk 2208:
ceived cutting characteristics of extracted teeth. J Dent Educ 1998 Health Service, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
622603. Health, 1990. HETA 881012008.

Chunk 2209:
407.American Dental Associations Council on Scientific Affairs and Coun 425.CDC. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Con

Chunk 2210:
cil on Dental Practice. Infection control recommendations for the dental trol of smoke from laserelectric surgical procedures. Cincinnati, OH

Chunk 2211:
office and the dental laboratory. J Am Dent Assoc 199612767280. US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Ser

Chunk 2212:
408.Dental Laboratory Relationship Working Group, Organization for vice, CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,

Chunk 2213:
Safety and Asepsis Procedures OSAP. Laboratory asepsis position 1996. DHHS publication no. NIOSH 96128.

Chunk 2214:
paper. Annapolis, MD OSAP Foundation, 1998. Available at http 426.Taravella MJ, Weinberg A, Blackburn P, May M. Do intact viral particles

Chunk 2215:
www.osap.orgissuespagespositionLAB.pdf. survive excimer laser ablation? Arch Ophthalmol 1997115102830.

Chunk 2216:
409.Kugel G, Perry RD, Ferrari M, Lalicata P. Disinfection and communi 427.Hagen KB, Kettering JD, Aprecio RM, Beltran F, Maloney RK. Lack

Chunk 2217:
cation practices a survey of U. S. dental laboratories. J Am Dent Assoc of virus transmission by the excimer laser plume. Am J Ophthalmol
200013178692. 199712420611.

Chunk 2218:
410.US Department of Transportation. 49 CFR 173.196 infectious sub 428.Kunachak S, Sithisarn P, Kulapaditharom B. Are laryngeal papilloma

Chunk 2219:
stances etiologic agents 173.197 regulated medical waste. Available virusinfected cells viable in the plume derived from a continuous mode

Chunk 2220:
at httpwww.access.gpo.govnaracfrwaisidx_0249cfr173_02.html. carbon dioxide laser, and are they infectious? A preliminary report on

Chunk 2221:
411.Chau VB, Saunders TR, Pimsler M, Elfring DR. Indepth disinfection one laser mode. J Laryng Otol 199611010313.

Chunk 2222:
of acrylic resins. J Prosthet Dent 19957430913. 429.Hughes PS, Hughes AP. Absence of human papillomavirus DNA in

Chunk 2223:
412.Powell GL, Runnells RD, Saxon BA, Whisenant BK. The presence the plume of erbium YAG lasertreated warts. J Am Acad Dermatol

Chunk 2224:
and identification of organisms transmitted to dental laboratories. 1998384268.
J Prosthet Dent 1990642357. 430.Garden JM, OBanion MK, Shelnitz LS, et al. Papillomavirus in the

Chunk 2225:
413.Giblin J, Podesta R, White J. Dimensional stability of impression vapor of carbon dioxide lasertreated verrucae. JAMA 1988259

Chunk 2226:
materials immersed in an iodophor disinfectant. Int J Prosthodont 11991202.
19903727. 431.Sawchuk WS, Weber PJ, Lowry DR, Dzubow LM. Infectious

Chunk 2227:
414.Plummer KD, Wakefield CW. Practical infection control in dental labo papillomavirus in the vapor of warts treated with carbon dioxide laser

Chunk 2228:
ratories. Gen Dent 1994425458. or electrocoagulation detection and protection. J Am Acad Dermatol
415.Merchant VA. Infection control in the dental laboratory equipment 198921419.

Chunk 2229:
Chapter 16. In Cottone JA, Terezhalamy GT, Molinari JA, eds. Prac 432.Baggish MS, Poiesz BJ, Joret D, Williamson P, Rafai A. Presence of

Chunk 2230:
tical infection control in dentisty. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD Williams human immunodeficiency virus DNA in laser smoke. Lasers Surg Med
Wilkins, 199623954. 199111197203.

Chunk 2231:
433.Capizzi PJ, Clay RP, Battey MJ. Microbiologic activity in laser resur
facing plume and debris. Lasers Surg Med 1998231724.
60 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 2232:
434.McKinley IB Jr, Ludlow MO. Hazards of laser smoke during endo 454.Hill AF, Butterworth RJ, Joiner S, et al. Investigation of variant

Chunk 2233:
dontic therapy. J Endodontics 1994205589. CreutzfeldtJakob disease and other human prion diseases with tonsil

Chunk 2234:
435.Favero MS, Bolyard EA. Microbiologic considerations. Disinfection biopsy specimens. Lancet 19993531839.

Chunk 2235:
and sterilization strategies and the potential for airborne transmission 455.Brown P, Gibbs CJ Jr, RodgersJohnson P, et al. Human spongiform

Chunk 2236:
of bloodborne pathogens. Surg Clin North Am 199575107189. encephalopathy the National Institutes of Health series of 300 cases

Chunk 2237:
436.Association of Operating Room Nurses. Recommended practices for of experimentally transmitted disease. Ann Neurol 19943551329.

Chunk 2238:
laser safety in the practice setting. In Fogg D, ed. Standards, recom 456.Brown P. Environmental causes of human spongiform encephalopa

Chunk 2239:
mended practices and guidelines. Denver, CO AORN, 2003. thy Chapter 8. In Baker HF, Baker HF, eds. Prion diseases. Totowa,

Chunk 2240:
437.Streifel AJ. Recognizing IAQ risk and implementing an IAQ program. NJ Humana Press Inc, 199613954.

Chunk 2241:
In Hansen W, ed. A guide to managing indoor air quality in health 457.Carp RI. Transmission of scrapie by oral route effect of gingival scari

Chunk 2242:
care organizations. Oakbrook Terrace, IL Joint Commission on fication. Lancet 198211701.

Chunk 2243:
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations Publishers, 1997. 458.Ingrosso L, Pisani F, Pocchiari M. Transmission of the 263K scrapie

Chunk 2244:
438.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis strain by the dental route. J Gen Virol 19998030437.

Chunk 2245:
tration. Safety and health topics laserelectrosurgery plume. Washing 459.Bernoulli C, Siegfried J, Baumgartner G, et al. Danger of accidental

Chunk 2246:
ton DC US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health persontoperson transmission of CreutzfeldtJakob disease by surgery.

Chunk 2247:
Administration, 2003. Available at httpwww.oshaslc.govSLTC Lancet 197714789.
laserelectrosurgeryplume. 460.Brown P, Gajdusek DC, Gibbs CJ Jr, Asher DM. Potential epidemic of

Chunk 2248:
439.American Thoracic Society, CDC. Diagnostic standards and classifi CreutzfeldtJakob disease from human growth hormone therapy.

Chunk 2249:
cation of tuberculosis in adults and children. Am J Resp Crit Care N Engl J Med 198531372831.
2000161137695. 461.CDC. Fatal degenerative neurologic disease in patients who received

Chunk 2250:
440.Wells WF. Aerodynamics of droplet nuclei Chapter 3. In Wells WF, pituitaryderived human growth hormone. MMWR 19853435960,

Chunk 2251:
ed. Airborne contagion and air hygiene an ecological study of droplet 3656.

Chunk 2252:
infections. Cambridge, MA Harvard University Press, 1955. 462.Duffy P, Wolf J, Collins G, DeVoe AG, Streeten B, Cowen D. Possible

Chunk 2253:
441.CDC. Prevention and treatment of tuberculosis among patients persontoperson transmission of CreutzfeldtJakob disease. N Engl

Chunk 2254:
infected with human immunodeficiency virus principles of therapy J Med 19742906923.

Chunk 2255:
and revised recommendations. MMWR 199847No. RR20. 463.CDC. Epidemiologic notes and reports rapidly progressive dementia

Chunk 2256:
442.Smith WH, Davies D, Mason KD, Onions JP. Intraoral and pulmo in a patient who received a cadaveric dura mater graft. MMWR

Chunk 2257:
nary tuberculosis following dental treatment. Lancet 198218424. 1987364950, 55.

Chunk 2258:
443.CDC. Selfreported tuberculin skin testing among Indian Health Ser 464.Thadani V, Penar PL, Partington J, et al. CreutzfeldtJakob disease prob

Chunk 2259:
vice and Bureau of Prisons dentists, 1993. MMWR 19944320911. ably acquired from a cadaveric dura mater graft. Case report.

Chunk 2260:
444.Mikitka D, Mills SE, Dazey SE, Gabriel ME. Tuberculosis infection in J Neurosurg 1988697669.

Chunk 2261:
US Air Force dentists. Am J Dent 19958336. 465.Kondo K, Kuroiwa Y. A case control study of CreutzfeldtJakob dis

Chunk 2262:
445.CDC. World Health Organization consultation on public health issues ease association with physical injuries. Ann Neurol 19821137781.

Chunk 2263:
related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the emergence of a 466.Van Duijn CM, DelasnerieLaupretre N, Masullo C, et al, and Euro

Chunk 2264:
new variant of CreutzfeldtJakob Disease. MMWR 1996452956. pean Union EU Collaborative Study Group of CreutzfeldtJacob dis

Chunk 2265:
446.CDC. Surveillance for CreutzfeldtJakob diseaseUnited States. ease CJD. Casecontrol study of risk factors of CreutzfeldtJakob
MMWR 1996456658. disease in Europe during 199395. Lancet 199835110815.

Chunk 2266:
447.Johnson RT, Gibbs CJ Jr. CreutzfeldtJakob disease and related trans 467.Collins S, Law MG, Fletcher A, Boyd A, Kaldor J, Masters CL. Surgi

Chunk 2267:
missible spongiform encephalopathies. N Engl J Med 1998339 cal treatment and risk of sporadic CreutzfeldtJakob disease a case
19942004. control study. Lancet 19993536937.

Chunk 2268:
448.CDC. New variant CJD fact sheet. Atlanta, GA US Department of 468.BlanquetGrossard F, Sazdovitch V, Jean A, et al. Prion protein is not

Chunk 2269:
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, CDC, 2003. Avail detectable in dental pulp from patients with CreutzfeldtJakob dis

Chunk 2270:
able at httpwww.cdc.govncidoddiseasescjdcjd_fact_sheet.htm. ease. J Dent Res 200079700.

Chunk 2271:
449.Will RG, Ironside JW, Zeidler M, et al. A new variant of Creutzfeldt 469.World Health Organization. Infection control guidelines for transmis

Chunk 2272:
Jakob disease in the UK. Lancet 19963479215. sible spongiform encephalopathies report of a WHO consultation,

Chunk 2273:
450.Bruce ME, Will RG, Ironside JW, et al. Transmission to mice indicate Geneva, Switzerland, 2326 March 1999. Geneva, Switzerland World

Chunk 2274:
that new variant CJD is caused by the BSE agent. Nature 1997389 Health Organization, 2000. Available at httpwww.who.intemc
498501. documentstsewhocdscsraph2003c.html.

Chunk 2275:
451.Collinge J, Sidle KC, Meads J, Ironside J, Hill AF. Molecular analysis 470.Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality of Health Care in

Chunk 2276:
of prion strain variation and the aetiology of new variant CJD. America. Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donadlson MS, eds. To err is

Chunk 2277:
Nature 199638368590. human building a safe health system. Washington, DC National Acad
452.World Health Organization. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy BSE. emy Press, 1999.

Chunk 2278:
Fact Sheet No. 113. Geneva, Switzerland World Health Organiza 471.CDC. Framework for program evaluation in public health. MMWR

Chunk 2279:
tion, 2002. Available at httpwww.who.intmediacentrefactsheets 199948No. RR11.
fs113en.
453.CDC. Probable variant CreutzfeldtJakob disease in a U.S. resident
Florida, 2002. MMWR 2002519279.

Chunk 2280:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 61
Advisory Group

Chunk 2281:
Advisory Group
Joseph A. Bartoloni, D.M.D., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois Nancy Bjerke, M.A., M.Ed., M.P.H., Infection

Chunk 2282:
Control Associates, San Antonio, Texas Walter W. Bond, M.S., RCSA Inc., Lawrenceville, Georgia Eve Cuny, M.S., University of Pacific School of Dentistry,

Chunk 2283:
San Francisco, California Kathy J. Eklund, M.H.P., Forsyth Institute, Boston, Massachusetts Curt Hamann, M.D., Smart Practice, Phoenix, Arizona

Chunk 2284:
Jennifer A. Harte, D.D.S., United States Air Force Dental Investigation Service, Great Lakes, Illinois Chris Miller, Ph.D., Indiana University School of

Chunk 2285:
Dentistry, Bloomington, Indiana Shannon E. Mills, D.D.S., Air Force Medical Operations Agency, Bolling AFB, Washington, District of Columbia John

Chunk 2286:
Molinari, Ph.D., University of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry, Detroit, Michigan William A. Rutala, Ph.D., University of North Carolina School of

Chunk 2287:
Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina Brian Shearer, Ph.D., Bayer, Inc., Chicago, Illinois.
CDC Consultants

Chunk 2288:
CDC Consultants
Matthew Arduino, Dr.P.H., Elizabeth Bolyard, M.P.H., Denise Cardo, M.D., Joe Carpenter, Linda Chiarello, M.P.H., Lynne Sehulster, Ph.D., Division of

Chunk 2289:
Healthcare Quality Promotion, National Center for Infectious Diseases NCID, Atlanta, Georgia Miriam J. Alter, Ph.D., Division of Viral Hepatitis, NCID

Chunk 2290:
Larry Schonberger, Ph.D., Ermias Belay, M.D., Division of Viral and Ricketsial Diseases, NCID, Atlanta, Georgia Susan Y. Chu, Ph.D., National Immunization

Chunk 2291:
Program, Atlanta, Georgia Paul A. Jensen, National Center for HIV, STD and TB Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia Janice Huy, National Institute of Occupational

Chunk 2292:
Safety and Health NIOSH, Cincinnati, Ohio Lee Petsonk, NIOSH, Morgantown, West Virginia Jennifer L. Cleveland, D.D.S., Amy S. Collins, M.P.H.,

Chunk 2293:
Barbara F. Gooch, D.M.D., William G. Kohn, D.D.S., Dolores M. Malvitz, Dr.P.H., Division of Oral Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion, Atlanta Georgia.

Chunk 2294:
Other Federal Consultants
Susan Runner, D.D.S., Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland Elise Handelman, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Washington,

Chunk 2295:
District of Columbia Jeffrey Kempter, M.S., David Liem, Ph.D., Michelle Wingfield, Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, District of Columbia.
Outside Consultants

Chunk 2296:
Outside Consultants
Martin S. Favero, Ph.D., Advanced Sterilization Products, Johnson and Johnson, Irvine, California Pamela Rodgers, Ph.D., SmartHealth Inc., Phoenix,

Chunk 2297:
Arizona Daniel M. Meyer, D.D.S., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois Deborah Greenspan, BDS, DSC University of California San Francisco

Chunk 2298:
School of Dentistry, San Francisco, California Helene Bednarsh, Boston Department of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts Steve Peake, Barnstead

Chunk 2299:
Harvey Corp, Dubuque, Iowa Chakwan Siew, Ph.D., American Dental Association, Chicago, Illinois.
62 MMWR December 19, 2003
Appendix A
Regulatory Framework for Disinfectants and Sterilants

Chunk 2300:
When using the guidance provided in this report may be used without causing unreasonable adverse effects, the

Chunk 2301:
regarding use of liquid chemical disinfectants and sterilants, product and its labeling are given an EPA registration num

Chunk 2302:
dental healthcare personnel DHCP should be aware of fed ber, and the manufacturer may then sell and distribute the

Chunk 2303:
eral laws and regulations that govern the sale, distribution, product in the United States. FIFRA requires users of prod

Chunk 2304:
and use of these products. In particular, DHCPs should know ucts to follow the labeling directions on each product explicitly.

Chunk 2305:
what requirements pertain to them when such products are The following statement appears on all EPAregistered prod

Chunk 2306:
used. Finally, DHCP should understand the relative roles of uct labels under the Directions for Use heading It is a viola

Chunk 2307:
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA, the U.S. tion of federal law to use this product inconsistent with its

Chunk 2308:
Food and Drug Administration FDA, the Occupational labeling. This means that DHCP must follow the safety pre

Chunk 2309:
Safety and Health Administration OSHA and CDC. cautions and use directions on the labeling of each registered

Chunk 2310:
The choice of specific cleaning or disinfecting agents is largely product. Not following the specified dilution, contact time,

Chunk 2311:
a matter of judgment, guided by product label claims and method of application, or any other condition of use is con

Chunk 2312:
instructions and government regulations. A single liquid chemi sidered misuse of the product.

Chunk 2313:
cal germicide might not satisfy all disinfection requirements FDA, under the authority of the 1976 Medical Devices

Chunk 2314:
in a given dental practice or facility. Realistic use of liquid Amendment to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, regulates

Chunk 2315:
chemical germicides depends on consideration of multiple fac chemical germicides if they are advertised and marketed for

Chunk 2316:
tors, including the degree of microbial killing required the use on specific medical devices e.g., dental unit waterline or

Chunk 2317:
nature and composition of the surface, item, or device to be flexible endoscope. A liquid chemical germicide marketed for

Chunk 2318:
treated and the cost, safety, and ease of use of the available use on a specific device is considered, for regulatory purposes,

Chunk 2319:
agents. Selecting one appropriate product with a higher de a medical device itself when used to disinfect that specific medi

Chunk 2320:
gree of potency to cover all situations might be more conve cal device. Also, this FDA regulatory authority over a particu
nient. lar instrument or device dictates that the manufacturer is

Chunk 2321:
In the United States, liquid chemical germicides disinfec obligated to provide the user with adequate instructions for

Chunk 2322:
tants are regulated by EPA and FDA A1A3. In health the safe and effective use of that device. These instructions

Chunk 2323:
care settings, EPA regulates disinfectants that are used on must include methods to clean and disinfect or sterilize the

Chunk 2324:
environmental surfaces housekeeping and clinical contact item if it is to be marketed as a reusable medical device.

Chunk 2325:
surfaces, and FDA regulates liquid chemical sterilants OSHA develops workplace standards to help ensure safe and

Chunk 2326:
highlevel disinfectants e.g., glutaraldehyde, hydrogen perox healthful working conditions in places of employment. OSHA

Chunk 2327:
ide, and peracetic acid used on critical and semicritical patient is authorized under Pub. L. 95251, and as amended, to en

Chunk 2328:
care devices. Disinfectants intended for use on clinical contact force these workplace standards. In 1991, OSHA published

Chunk 2329:
surfaces e.g., light handles, radiographicray heads, or drawer Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens final rule

Chunk 2330:
knobs or housekeeping surfaces e.g., floors, walls, or sinks 29 CFR Part 1910.1030 A5. This standard is designed to

Chunk 2331:
are regulated in interstate commerce by the Antimicrobials help prevent occupational exposures to blood or other poten

Chunk 2332:
Division, Office of Pesticide Programs, EPA, under the tially infectious substances. Under this standard, OSHA has

Chunk 2333:
authority of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and interpreted that, to decontaminate contaminated work sur

Chunk 2334:
Rodenticide Act FIFRA of 1947, as amended in 1996 A4. faces, either an EPAregistered hospital tuberculocidal disin

Chunk 2335:
Under FIFRA, any substance or mixture of substances intended fectant or an EPAregistered hospital disinfectant labeled as

Chunk 2336:
to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, including effective against human immunodeficiency virus HIV and

Chunk 2337:
microorganisms but excluding those in or on living man or hepatitis B virus HBV is appropriate. Hospital disinfectants

Chunk 2338:
animals, must be registered before sale or distribution. To with such HIV and HBV claims can be used, provided sur

Chunk 2339:
obtain a registration, a manufacturer must submit specific data faces are not contaminated with agents or concentration of

Chunk 2340:
regarding the safety and the effectiveness of each product. agents for which higher level i.e., intermediatelevel disin

Chunk 2341:
EPA requires manufacturers to test formulations by using fection is recommended. In addition, as with all disinfectants,

Chunk 2342:
accepted methods for microbicidal activity, stability, and tox effectiveness is governed by strict adherence to the label

Chunk 2343:
icity to animals and humans. Manufacturers submit these data instructions for intended use of the product.
to EPA with proposed labeling. If EPA concludes a product

Chunk 2344:
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 63
CDC is not a regulatory agency and does not test, evaluate, against a primarily nosocomial pathogen. Substantiated label

Chunk 2345:
or otherwise recommend specific brandname products of claims of effectiveness of a disinfectant against specific micro

Chunk 2346:
chemical germicides. This report is intended to provide over organisms other than the test microorganisms are permitted,

Chunk 2347:
all guidance for providers to select general classifications of but not required, provided that the test microorganisms are

Chunk 2348:
products based on certain infectioncontrol principles. In this likely to be present in or on the recommended use areas and

Chunk 2349:
report, CDC provides guidance to practitioners regarding surfaces. Therefore, manufacturers might also test specifically

Chunk 2350:
appropriate application of EPA and FDAregistered liquid against organisms of known concern in healthcare practices

Chunk 2351:
chemical disinfectants and sterilants in dental healthcare set e.g., HIV, HBV, hepatitis C virus HCV, and herpes al
tings. though it is considered likely that any product satisfying AOAC

Chunk 2352:
CDC recommends disinfecting environmental surfaces or tests for hospital disinfectant designation will also be effective

Chunk 2353:
sterilizing or disinfecting medical equipment, and DHCP against these relatively fragile organisms when the product is

Chunk 2354:
should use products approved by EPA and FDA unless no used as directed by the manufacturer.

Chunk 2355:
such products are available for use against certain microorgan Potency against Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been recog

Chunk 2356:
isms or sites. However, if no registered or approved products nized as a substantial benchmark. However, the tuberculocidal

Chunk 2357:
are available for a specific pathogen or use situation, DHCP claim is used only as a benchmark to measure germicidal

Chunk 2358:
are advised to follow the specific guidance regarding unregis potency. Tuberculosis is not transmitted via environmental sur

Chunk 2359:
tered or unapproved e.g., offlabel uses for various chemical faces but rather by the airborne route. Accordingly, use of such

Chunk 2360:
germicides. For example, no antimicrobial products are regis products on environmental surfaces plays no role in prevent

Chunk 2361:
tered for use specifically against certain emerging pathogens ing the spread of tuberculosis. However, because mycobacte

Chunk 2362:
e.g., Norwalk virus, potential terrorism agents e.g., variola ria have among the highest intrinsic levels of resistance among

Chunk 2363:
major or Yersinia pestis, or CreutzfeldtJakob disease agents. the vegetative bacteria, viruses, and fungi, any germicide with

Chunk 2364:
One point of clarification is the difference in how EPA and a tuberculocidal claim on the label is considered capable of

Chunk 2365:
FDA classify disinfectants. FDA adopted the same basic ter inactivating a broad spectrum of pathogens, including such

Chunk 2366:
minology and classification scheme as CDC to categorize lessresistant organisms as bloodborne pathogens e.g., HBV,

Chunk 2367:
medical devices i.e., critical, semicritical, and noncritical and HCV, and HIV. It is this broadspectrum capability, rather

Chunk 2368:
to define antimicrobial potency for processing surfaces i.e., than the products specific potency against mycobacteria, that

Chunk 2369:
sterilization, and high, intermediate and lowlevel disinfec is the basis for protocols and regulations dictating use of

Chunk 2370:
tion A6. EPA registers environmental surface disinfectants tuberculocidal chemicals for surface disinfection.

Chunk 2371:
based on the manufacturers microbiological activity claims EPA also lists disinfectant products according to their

Chunk 2372:
when registering its disinfectant. This difference has led to con labeled use against these organisms of interest as follows

Chunk 2373:
fusion on the part of users because the EPA does not use the cid127 List B. Tuberculocide products effective against Mycobac

Chunk 2374:
terms intermediate and lowlevel disinfectants as used in CDC terium species.
guidelines. cid127 List C. Products effective against human HIV1 virus.

Chunk 2375:
CDC designates any EPAregistered hospital disinfectant cid127 List D. Products effective against human HIV1 virus and
without a tuberculocidal claim as a lowlevel disinfectant and HBV.

Chunk 2376:
any EPAregistered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal cid127 List E. Products effective against Mycobacterium species,

Chunk 2377:
claim as an intermediatelevel disinfectant. To understand this human HIV1 virus, and HBV.
comparison, one needs to know how EPA registers disinfec cid127 List F. Products effective against HCV.

Chunk 2378:
tants. First, to be labeled as an EPA hospital disinfectant, the Microorganisms vary in their resistance to disinfection and

Chunk 2379:
product must pass Association of Official Analytical Chemists sterilization, enabling CDCs designation of disinfectants as

Chunk 2380:
AOAC effectiveness tests against three target organisms Sal high, intermediate, and lowlevel, when compared with EPAs

Chunk 2381:
monella choleraesuis for effectiveness against gramnegative designated organism spectrum Figure. However, exceptions

Chunk 2382:
bacteria Staphylococcus aureus for effectiveness against gram to this general guide exist, and manufacturers label claims and

Chunk 2383:
positive bacteria and Pseudomonas aeruginosa for effectiveness instructions should always be followed.
64 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 2384:
FIGURE. Decreasing order of resistance of microorganisms to germicidal chemicals
Organism Processing Level Required
Sterilization
Bacterial spores FDA sterilanthighlevel disinfectant

Chunk 2385:
Geobacillus stearothermophilus CDC sterilanthighlevel disinfectant
Bacillus atrophaeus
Mycobacteria EPA hospital disinfectant with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis tuberculocidal claim

Chunk 2386:
Nonlipid or small viruses CDC intermediatelevel disinfectant
Polio virus
Coxsackle virus
Rhinovirus
Fungi
Aspergillus
Candida
Vegetative bacteria EPA hospital disinfectant

Chunk 2387:
Staphylococcus species CDC lowlevel disinfectant
Pseudomonus species
Salmonella species
Lipid or mediumsized viruses
Human immunodeficiency virus
Herpes simplex virus
Hepatitis B and hepatitis C

Chunk 2388:
Coronavirus
Source Adapted from Bond WW, Ott BJ, Franke K, McCracken JE. Effective use of liquid chemical germicides on medical devices instrument design

Chunk 2389:
problems. In Block SS, ed. Disinfection, sterilization and preservation. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA Lea Gebiger, 19911100.
References A4.US Environmental Protection Agency. 40 CFR Parts 152, 156, and

Chunk 2390:
A1.Food and Drug Administration FDA and US Environmental Pro 158. Exemption of certain pesticide substances from federal insecti

Chunk 2391:
tection Agency EPA. Memorandum of understanding between the cide, fungicide, and rodenticide act requirements. Amended 1996.

Chunk 2392:
FDA and EPA notice regarding matters of mutual responsibility Federal Register 19966188769.

Chunk 2393:
regulation of liquid chemical germicides intended for use on medical A5.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis

Chunk 2394:
devices. Rockville, MD US Department of Health and Human Ser tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne

Chunk 2395:
vices, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, US pathogens needlesticks and other sharps injuries final rule. Federal

Chunk 2396:
Environmental Protection Agency, 1993. Register 200166531725. As amended from and includes 29 CFR

Chunk 2397:
A2.Food and Drug Administration FDA. Interim measures for registra Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens

Chunk 2398:
tion of antimicrobial productsliquid chemical germicides with medi final rule. Federal Register 1991566417482. Available at httpwww.

Chunk 2399:
cal device use claims under the memorandum of understanding between osha.govSLTCdentistryindex.html.

Chunk 2400:
EPA and FDA. Rockville, MD US Department of Health and A6.Spaulding EH. Role of chemical disinfection in preventing nosoco

Chunk 2401:
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration, 1994. mial infections. In Proceedings of the International Conference on

Chunk 2402:
A3.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA Nosocomial Infections, 1970. Brachman PS, Eickhoff TC, eds. Chi

Chunk 2403:
reviewers content and format of premarket notification 510k sub cago, IL American Hospital Association, 197124754.
missions for liquid chemical sterilantshigh level disinfectants. Rockville,

Chunk 2404:
MD US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration, 2000. Available at httpwww.fda.govcdrhode
397.pdf.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 65
Appendix B

Chunk 2405:
Appendix B
Immunizations Strongly Recommended for HealthCare Personnel HCP
Major precautions
Vaccine Dose schedule Indications and contraindications Special considerations

Chunk 2406:
Hepatitis B Threedose schedule Healthcare personnel HCP History of anaphylactic reaction to No therapeutic or adverse effects on hepatitis

Chunk 2407:
recombinant administered intramuscularly at risk for exposure to blood common bakers yeast. Pregnancy B virus HBVinfected persons cost

Chunk 2408:
vaccine IM in the deltoid 0,1,6 and body fluids. is not a contraindication. effectiveness of prevaccination screening for
second dose administered 1 susceptibility to HBV depends on costs of

Chunk 2409:
month after first dose third dose vaccination and antibody testing and
administered 4 months after prevalence of immunity in the group of

Chunk 2410:
second. Booster doses are not potential vaccinees healthcare personnel who
necessary for persons who have have ongoing contact with patients or blood

Chunk 2411:
developed adequate antibodies should be tested 12 months after completing
to hepatitis B surface antigen the vaccination series to determine serologic

Chunk 2412:
antiHBs. response. If vaccination does not induce
adequate antiHBs 10 mIUmL, a second
vaccine series should be administered.

Chunk 2413:
Influenza Annual singledose vaccination HCP who have contact with History of anaphylactic hypersensi Recommended for women who will be in the

Chunk 2414:
vaccine IM with current vaccine. patients at high risk or who tivity to eggs or to other compo second or third trimesters of pregnancy during

Chunk 2415:
inactivated work in chroniccare facilities nents of the vaccine. the influenza season and women in any stage
HCP aged 50 years or who of pregnancy who have chronic medical

Chunk 2416:
have highrisk medical conditions that are associated with an
conditions. increased risk of influenza.

Chunk 2417:
Measles live One dose administered HCP who were born during or Pregnancy immunocompromised Measles, mumps, rubella MMR is the

Chunk 2418:
virus vaccine subcutaneously SC second after 1957 without documenta state including human immunode recommended vaccine, if recipients are also

Chunk 2419:
dose 4 weeks later. tion of 1 receipt of 2 doses of ficiency virus HIVinfected likely to be susceptible to rubella or mumps

Chunk 2420:
live vaccine on or after their first persons with severe immunosup persons vaccinated during 19631967 with

Chunk 2421:
birthday, 2 physiciandiagnosed pression history of anaphylactic 1 measles killedvirus vaccine alone,

Chunk 2422:
measles, or 3 laboratory reactions after gelatin ingestion or 2 killedvirus vaccine followed by livevirus

Chunk 2423:
evidence of immunity. Vaccine receipt of neomycin or recent vaccine, or 3 a vaccine of unknown type,

Chunk 2424:
should also be considered for receipt of antibodycontaining should be revaccinated with two doses of
all HCP who have no proof of blood products. livevirus measles vaccine.

Chunk 2425:
immunity, including those born
before 1957.
Mumps live One dose SC no booster. HCP believed susceptible can Pregnancy immunocompromised MMR is the recommended vaccine.

Chunk 2426:
virus vaccine be vaccinated adults born state history of anaphylactic
before 1957 can be considered reaction after gelatin ingestion or
immune. receipt of neomycin.

Chunk 2427:
Rubella live One dose SC no booster. HCP, both male and female, Pregnancy immunocompromised Women pregnant when vaccinated or who

Chunk 2428:
virus vaccine who lack documentation of state history of anaphylactic become pregnant within 4 weeks of

Chunk 2429:
receipt of live vaccine on or reaction after receipt of neomycin. vaccination should be counseled regarding
after their first birthday, or lack theoretic risks to the fetus however, the risk

Chunk 2430:
of laboratory evidence of of rubella vaccineassociated malformations
immunity can be vaccinated. among these women is negligible. MMR is the
Adults born before 1957 can recommended vaccine.

Chunk 2431:
be considered immune, except
women of childbearing age.
Varicellazoster Two 0.5 mL doses SC 48 HCP without reliable history of Pregnancy immunocompromised Because 7193 of U.S.born persons

Chunk 2432:
livevirus weeks apart if aged 13 years. varicella or laboratory evidence state history of anaphylactic without a history of varicella are immune,

Chunk 2433:
vaccine of varicella immunity. reaction after receipt of neomycin serologic testing before vaccination might be
or gelatin recent receipt of costeffective.
antibodycontaining blood products

Chunk 2434:
salicylate use should be avoided
for 6 weeks after vaccination.

Chunk 2435:
Sources Adapted from Bolyard EA, Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee. Guidelines for infection control in health care personnel, 1998. Am J Infect Control
199826289354.

Chunk 2436:
199826289354.
CDC. Immunization of healthcare workers recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ACIP and the Hospital Infection Control Practices

Chunk 2437:
Advisory Committee HICPAC. MMWR 199746No. RR18.
CDC. Prevention and control of influenza recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ACIP. MMWR 200352134.

Chunk 2438:
CDC. Using live, attenuated influenza vaccine for prevention and control of influenza supplemental recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ACIP. MMWR 200352No. RR13.

Chunk 2439:
A federal standard issued in December 1991 under the Occupational Safety and Health Act mandates that hepatitis B vaccine be made available at the employers expense to

Chunk 2440:
all HCP occupationally exposed to blood or other potentially infectious materials. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration requires that employers make available

Chunk 2441:
hepatitis B vaccinations, evaluations, and followup procedures in accordance with current CDC recommendations.

Chunk 2442:
Persons immunocompromised because of immune deficiencies, HIV infection, leukemia, lymphoma, generalized malignancy or persons receiving immunosuppressive therapy

Chunk 2443:
with corticosteroids, alkylating drugs, antimetabolites or persons receiving radiation.

Chunk 2444:
Vaccination of pregnant women after the first trimester might be preferred to avoid coincidental association with spontaneous abortions, which are most common during the first

Chunk 2445:
trimester. However, no adverse fetal effects have been associated with influenza vaccination.

Chunk 2446:
A live attenuated influenza vaccine LAIV is FDAapproved for healthy persons aged 549 years. Because of the possibility of transmission of vaccine viruses from recipients

Chunk 2447:
of LAIV to other persons and in the absence of data on the risk of illness and among immunocompromised persons infected with LAIV viruses, the inactivated influenza vaccine

Chunk 2448:
is preferred for HCP who have close contact with immunocompromised persons.
66 MMWR December 19, 2003
Appendix C
Methods for Sterilizing and Disinfecting PatientCare Items
and Environmental Surfaces

Chunk 2449:
Healthcare application
Type of Environmental
Process Result Method Examples patientcare item surfaces
Sterilization Destroys all microorgan Heatautomated Not applicable

Chunk 2450:
isms, including bacterial High temperature Steam, dry heat, unsaturated chemical vapor Heattolerant critical
spores. and semicritical

Chunk 2451:
Low temperature Ethylene oxide gas, plasma sterilization Heatsensitive critical
and semicritical
Liquid immersion Chemical sterilants. Glutaraldehyde, Heatsensitive critical

Chunk 2452:
glutaraldehydes with phenol, hydrogen and semicritical
peroxide, hydrogen peroxide with peracetic acid,
peracetic acid

Chunk 2453:
peracetic acid
Highlevel Destroys all microorgan Heatautomated Washerdisinfector Heatsensitive Not applicable
disinfection isms, but not necessarily semicritical
high numbers of bacterial

Chunk 2454:
spores. Liquid immersion Chemical sterilantshighlevel disinfectants.
Glutaraldehyde, glutaraldehyde with phenol,
hydrogen peroxide, hydrogen peroxide with
peracetic acid, orthophthalaldehyde

Chunk 2455:
Intermediate Destroys vegetative bacteria Liquid contact U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA Noncritical with visible Clinical contact

Chunk 2456:
level and the majority of fungi and registered hospital disinfectant with label claim blood surfaces blood
disinfection viruses. Inactivates of tuberculocidal activity e.g., chlorine spills on

Chunk 2457:
Mycobacterium bovis. Not containing products, quaternary ammonium housekeeping
necessarily capable of killing compounds with alcohol, phenolics, iodophors, surfaces

Chunk 2458:
bacterial spores. EPAregistered chlorinebased product
Lowlevel Destroys the majority of Liquid contact EPAregistered hospital disinfectant with no Noncritical without Clinical contact

Chunk 2459:
disinfection vegetative bacteria, certain label claim regarding tuberculocidal activity. visible blood surfaces
fungi, and viruses. Does not The Occupational Safety and Health Administra housekeeping

Chunk 2460:
inactivate Mycobacterium tion also requires label claims of human surfaces
bovis . immunodeficiency virus HIV and hepatitis B
virus HBV potency for clinical contact surfaces

Chunk 2461:
e.g., quaternary ammonium compounds, some
phenolics, some iodophors

Chunk 2462:
EPA and the Food and Drug Administration FDA regulate chemical germicides used in healthcare settings. FDA regulates chemical sterilants used on critical and semicritical

Chunk 2463:
medical devices, and the EPA regulates gaseous sterilants and liquid chemical disinfectants used on noncritical surfaces. FDA also regulates medical devices, including

Chunk 2464:
sterilizers. More information is available at 1 httpwww.epa.govoppad001chemregindex.htm, 2 httpwww.fda.govcdrhindex.html, and 3 httpwww.fda.govcdrhode
germlab.html.

Chunk 2465:
germlab.html.
 Contact time is the single critical variable distinguishing the sterilization process from highlevel disinfection with FDAcleared liquid chemical sterilants. FDA defines a highlevel

Chunk 2466:
disinfectant as a sterilant used under the same contact conditions as sterilization except for a shorter immersion time C1.

Chunk 2467:
The tuberculocidal claim is used as a benchmark to measure germicidal potency. Tuberculosis TB is transmitted via the airborne route rather than by environmental surfaces

Chunk 2468:
and, accordingly, use of such products on environmental surfaces plays no role in preventing the spread of TB. Because mycobacteria have among the highest intrinsic levels of

Chunk 2469:
resistance among vegetative bacteria, viruses, and fungi, any germicide with a tuberculocidal claim on the label i.e., an intermediatelevel disinfectant is considered capable of

Chunk 2470:
inactivating a broad spectrum of pathogens, including much less resistant organisms, including bloodborne pathogens e.g., HBV, hepatitis C virus HCV, and HIV. It is this

Chunk 2471:
broadspectrum capability, rather than the products specific potency against mycobacteria, that is the basis for protocols and regulations dictating use of tuberculocidal

Chunk 2472:
chemicals for surface disinfection.

Chunk 2473:
Chlorinebased products that are EPAregistered as intermediatelevel disinfectants are available commercially. In the absence of an EPAregistered chlorinebased product, a

Chunk 2474:
fresh solution of sodium hypochlorite e.g., household bleach is an inexpensive and effective intermediatelevel germicide. Concentrations ranging from 500 ppm to 800 ppm of

Chunk 2475:
chlorine 1100 dilution of 5.25 bleach and tap water, or approximately ¼ cup of 5.25 bleach to 1 gallon of water are effective on environmental surfaces that have been

Chunk 2476:
cleaned of visible contamination. Appropriate personal protective equipment e.g., gloves and goggles should be worn when preparing hypochlorite solutions C2,C3. Caution

Chunk 2477:
should be exercised, because chlorine solutions are corrosive to metals, especially aluminum.

Chunk 2478:
Germicides labeled as hospital disinfectant without a tuberculocidal claim pass potency tests for activity against three representative microorganisms Pseudomonas aeruginosa,

Chunk 2479:
Staphylococcus aureus, and Salmonella choleraesuis.
References pathogens needlesticks and other sharps injuries final rule. Federal

Chunk 2480:
C1.Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry and FDA Register 200166531725. As amended from and includes 29 CFR

Chunk 2481:
reviewers content and format of premarket notification 510k sub Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens fi

Chunk 2482:
missions for liquid chemical sterilantshigh level disinfectants. Rockville, nal rule. Federal Register 1991566417482. Available at httpwww.

Chunk 2483:
MD US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug osha.govSLTCdentistryindex.html.

Chunk 2484:
Administration, 2000. Available at httpwww.fda.govcdrhode C3.CDC. Guidelines for environmental infection control in healthcare

Chunk 2485:
397.pdf. facilities recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Con
C2.US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Adminis trol Practices Advisory Committee HICPAC. MMWR 200352No.

Chunk 2486:
tration. 29 CFR Part 1910.1030. Occupational exposure to bloodborne RR10.
Vol. 52 RR17 Recommendations and Reports 67
68 MMWR December 19, 2003
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report

Chunk 2487:
Recommendations and Reports December 19, 2003 Vol. 52 No. RR17
Continuing Education Activity Sponsored by CDC
Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental HealthCare Settings 2003

Chunk 2488:
EXPIRATION December 19, 2006
You must complete and return the response form electronically or by mail by credit. If you return the form electronically, you will receive educational credit

Chunk 2489:
December 19, 2006, to receive continuing education credit. If you immediately. If you mail the form, you will receive educational credit in

Chunk 2490:
answer all of the questions, you will receive an award letter for 2.0 hours approximately 30 days. No fees are charged for participating in this continuing

Chunk 2491:
Continuing Medical Education CME credit 0.2 Continuing Education education activity.
Units CEUs or 2.2 contact hours Continuing Nursing Education CNE
INSTRUCTIONS
By Internet By Mail or Fax

Chunk 2492:
1. Read this MMWR Vol. 52, RR17, which contains the correct answers to 1. Read this MMWR Vol. 52, RR17, which contains the correct answers to

Chunk 2493:
the questions beginning on the next page. the questions beginning on the next page.

Chunk 2494:
2. Go to the MMWR Continuing Education Internet site at http 2. Complete all registration information on the response form, including your

Chunk 2495:
www.cdc.govmmwrcmeconted.html. name, mailing address, phone number, and email address, if available.

Chunk 2496:
3. Select which exam you want to take and select whether you want to register 3. Indicate whether you are registering for CME, CEU, or CNE credit.

Chunk 2497:
for CME, CEU, or CNE credit. 4. Select your answers to the questions, and mark the corresponding letters on

Chunk 2498:
4. Fill out and submit the registration form. the response form. To receive continuing education credit, you must

Chunk 2499:
5. Select exam questions. To receive continuing education credit, you must answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer

Chunk 2500:
answer all of the questions. Questions with more than one correct answer will instruct you to Indicate all that apply.

Chunk 2501:
will instruct you to Indicate all that apply. 5. Sign and date the response form or a photocopy of the form and send no

Chunk 2502:
6. Submit your answers no later than December 19, 2006. later than December 19, 2006, to
7. Immediately print your Certificate of Completion for your records. Fax 4046394198 MailMMWR CE Credit

Chunk 2503:
Office of Scientific and Health Communications
Epidemiology Program Office, MS C08
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1600 Clifton Rd, N.E.
Atlanta, GA 30333

Chunk 2504:
Atlanta, GA 30333
6. Your Certificate of Completion will be mailed to you within 30 days.
ACCREDITATION

Chunk 2505:
ACCREDITATION
Continuing Medical Education CME. CDC is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education ACCME to provide

Chunk 2506:
continuing medical education for physicians. CDC designates this educational activity for a maximum of 2.0 hours in category 1 credit toward the AMA

Chunk 2507:
Physicians Recognition Award. Each physician should claim only those hours of credit that heshe actually spent in the educational activity.

Chunk 2508:
Continuing Education Unit CEU. CDC has been approved as an authorized provider of continuing education and training programs by the

Chunk 2509:
International Association for Continuing Education and Training and awards 0.2 Continuing Education Units CEUs.

Chunk 2510:
Continuing Nursing Education CNE. This activity for 2.2 contact hours is provided by CDC, which is accredited as a provider of continuing education

Chunk 2511:
in nursing by the American Nurses Credentialing Centers Commission on Accreditation.

Chunk 2512:
CCCCCeeeeennnnnttttteeeeerrrrrsssss fffffooooorrrrr DDDDDiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee CCCCCooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll aaaaannnnnddddd PPPPPrrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn

Chunk 2513:
SSSSSAAAAAFFFFFEEEEERRRRR cid127cid127cid127cid127 HHHHHEEEEEAAAAALLLLLTTTTTHHHHHIIIIIEEEEERRRRR cid127cid127cid127cid127cid127 PPPPPEEEEEOOOOOPPPPPLLLLLEEEEETM

Chunk 2514:
CE2 MMWR December 19, 2003
Goal and Objectives
This MMWR provides recommendations regarding infection control practices for dentistry settings. These recommendations were prepared by CDC staff after

Chunk 2515:
consultation with staff from other federal agencies and specialists in dental infection control. The goal of this report is to minimize the risk of disease transmission

Chunk 2516:
in dental healthcare settings through improved understanding and practice of evidencebased infection control strategies. Upon completion of this continuing

Chunk 2517:
education activity, the reader should be able to 1 list the major components of a personnel health infectioncontrol program in the dental setting 2 list key measures

Chunk 2518:
for preventing transmission of bloodborne pathogens 3 describe key elements of instrument processing and sterilization 4 describe dental water quality concepts

Chunk 2519:
and 5 demonstrate the importance of developing an infectioncontrol program evaluation.
To receive continuing education credit, please answer all of the following questions.

Chunk 2520:
1. The components of a personnel health infection control program 7. Which of the following statements is true regarding monitoring the

Chunk 2521:
in a dental setting should include which of the following? correct functioning of a sterilizer?

Chunk 2522:
A. Infection control education and training for dental staff. A. A chemical indicator should be placed in a visible area of the package

Chunk 2523:
B. Appropriate immunizations against vaccinepreventable diseases. before sterilization processing.

Chunk 2524:
C. Exposure prevention and postexposure management strategies. B. A biological indicator spore test should be processed through a sterilizer

Chunk 2525:
D. Policies regarding workrelated illness and work restrictions. cycle at least once a week.

Chunk 2526:
E. Confidentiality of workrelated medical evaluations for dental staff. C. A biological indicator control test matching the same lot of the spore

Chunk 2527:
F. All of the above. test should be submitted with the sterilizer spore test.
D. Mechanical assessments of sterilizer cycle time and temperature should

Chunk 2528:
2. Which of the following is true regarding standard infectioncontrol be monitored.
precautions? E. All of the above.
A. Standard precautions are strategies used to reduce the risk of

Chunk 2529:
transmission of pathogens in the healthcare setting. 8. Low to intermediatelevel disinfectants used to clean environmental
surfaces . . . Indicate all that apply.

Chunk 2530:
B. Standard precautions should be used in caring for all patients,
regardless of their infectious status. A. rapidly inactivate human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B

Chunk 2531:
C. Expanded or transmissionbased precautions are used beyond virus on clinical contact and housekeeping surfaces.

Chunk 2532:
standard precautions to interrupt the spread of certain pathogens. B. must be FDAregistered.

Chunk 2533:
D. Standard precautions apply to exposure to blood, all body fluids and C. are used after prompt removal of blood or body substance

Chunk 2534:
secretions except sweat, nonintact skin, and mucous membranes. contamination on a surface.
E. All of the above. D. are appropriate to disinfect floors, depending on type of contamination.

Chunk 2535:
F. None of the above. E. all of the above.
F. A, C, and D are correct.
3. Factors to consider in assessing need for followup after an occupational

Chunk 2536:
blood or body fluid exposure include . . . 9. Which of the following statements is true regarding dental unit
A. the type of exposure. waterlines?

Chunk 2537:
B. the type of body fluid. A. If municipal water is the source that enters the dental unit waterline,

Chunk 2538:
C. the bloodborne pathogen infection status of the source. output will always meet drinking water quality.

Chunk 2539:
D. the susceptibility of the exposed person. B. Flushing the waterlines for 2 minutes at the beginning of the day
E. all of the above. reduces the biofilm in the waterlines.

Chunk 2540:
F. none of the above. C. Dentists should consult with the manufacturer of the dental unit or
water delivery system to determine the best method for maintaining

Chunk 2541:
4. Which of the following is not usually worn as personal protective optimal water quality.

Chunk 2542:
equipment when anticipating spatter of blood or body fluids? D. Dental unit waterlines can reliably deliver optimal water quality when

Chunk 2543:
A. Jacket with long sleeves. used for irrigation during a surgical procedure.
B. Gloves. E. All of the above.
C. Head covering. F. A, B, and D are correct.
D. Protective eyewear or face shield.

Chunk 2544:
10.Which of the following is true regarding a dental clinic infection
E. Face mask.
control program evaluation?

Chunk 2545:
5. Which of the following is not true regarding gloves? A. A method to ensure a safe working environment should be in place to
reduce the risk of healthcareassociated infections among patients

Chunk 2546:
A. Certain hand lotions can affect the integrity of gloves.
and occupational exposures among dental healthcare personnel.
B. Wearing gloves replaces the need for handwashing.

Chunk 2547:
B. Evaluation of a program should include documenting periodic
C. Sterile surgical gloves are recommended for oral surgical procedures.
observational assessments, reviewing completed checklists, and

Chunk 2548:
D. The Food and Drug Administration FDA has identified glove failure
reviewing occupational exposures.
rates for manufacturers.
C. An evaluation program does not improve an infection control program.

Chunk 2549:
E. Certain glove materials can interfere with the setting of impression
D. A and B are correct.
materials.
E. A and C are correct.

Chunk 2550:
6. Which of the following statements regarding processing of contaminated F. All of the above.
instruments is true?
11.Indicate your work setting.

Chunk 2551:
A. Instruments should be processed in an area separate from where clean
A. Private dental practice.
instruments are stored.
B. Hospital dental setting.

Chunk 2552:
B. Personnel should wear heavyduty utility gloves.
C. Academic institution.
C. Instruments only need cleaning if they have visible contamination.
D. Laboratory.

Chunk 2553:
D. Laboratory.
D. Instruments should be heatsterilized unless they are heatsensitive.
E. Other public health setting.
E. Cleaning an instrument precedes all sterilization and disinfection

Chunk 2554:
processes. F. Other.
F. A, B, D, and E are correct.
Vol. 52 No. RR17 Recommendations and Reports CE3
Detach or photocopy.
tiderC
noitacudE
gniunitnoC
rof
mroF
esnopseR
RWMM
71RR
.oN25
.loV3002
,91

Chunk 2555:
.oN25
.loV3002
,91
rebmeceD
latneD
ni lortnoC
noitcefnI
rof
senilediuG
3002

Chunk 2556:
sgnitteS
eraChtlaeH
12.Which best describes your professional activities? 17.After reading this report, I am confident I can list key measures for

Chunk 2557:
A. Dentist. D. Dental office staff. preventing transmission of bloodborne pathogens.
B. Dental hygienist. E. Other medical profession. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.

Chunk 2558:
C. Dental laboratory staff. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
C. Neither agree nor disagree.
13.I plan to use these recommendations as the basis for . . . Indicate all

Chunk 2559:
that apply. 18.After reading this report, I am confident I can describe key elements of
A. health education materials. D. public policy. instrument processing and sterilization.

Chunk 2560:
B. insurance reimbursement policies. E. other. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.
C. local practice guidelines. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
C. Neither agree nor disagree.

Chunk 2561:
14.Each month, approximately how many dental patients do you treat?
A. None. D. 51100. 19.After reading this report, I am confident I can describe dental water
B. 110. E. 101200. quality concepts.

Chunk 2562:
C. 1150. F. 200. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.
B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
15.How much time did you spend reading this report and completing the C. Neither agree nor disagree.
exam?

Chunk 2563:
exam?
A. 2.0 hours. C. 3.0 hours but 4.0. 20.After reading this report, I am confident I can demonstrate the importance

Chunk 2564:
B. 2.0 hours but 3.0 hours. D. 4.0 hours. of developing an infectioncontrol program evaluation.
A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.

Chunk 2565:
16.After reading this report, I am confident I can list the major B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
components of a personnel health infection control program in the C. Neither agree nor disagree.

Chunk 2566:
dental setting.
A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. 21.The objectives are relevant to the goal of this report.
B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.

Chunk 2567:
C. Neither agree nor disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
C. Neither agree nor disagree.
tsum
uoy
,tiderc
noitacude
gniunitnoc
eviecer
oT
noitamrofni
tcatnoc
ruoy
edivorp.1
tiderc
ENC
ro
,UEC

Chunk 2568:
tiderc
ENC
ro
,UEC
,EMC
fo
eciohc
ruoy
etacidni.2
snoitseuq
tset
eht
fo
lla
rewsna.3
ypocotohp
a
ro
mrof
siht
etad
dna
ngis.4
.6002
,91 rebmeceD
yb
mrof
rewsna
ruoy
timbus.5
ro
yaled
a ni tluser
nac

Chunk 2569:
a ni tluser
nac
smeti
eseht
etelpmoc
ot
eruliaF
.tiderc
noitacude
gniunitnoc
rof
noitacilppa
ruoy
fo noitcejer
enO
kcehC
emaN
tsriF
emaN
tsaL
tiderC
EMC
tiderC
UEC
xoB
.O.P
ro
sserddA
teertS
tiderC

Chunk 2570:
teertS
tiderC
ENC
etiuS
ro
tnemtrapA
edoC PIZ
etatS
ytiC
rebmuN
xaF
rebmuN
enohP
sserddA
liaME
lla
rewsna
tsum
uoy ,rebmemeR
.srewsna
ruoy
etacidni
ot
skcolb
etairporppa
eht
ni
lliF
!tiderc
noitacude

Chunk 2571:
!tiderc
noitacude
gniunitnoc
eviecer
ot
snoitseuq
eht
fo
D

Chunk 2572:
C B
 
A 

.51
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.1
E


D


C B
 
A 

.61
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.2
E


D


C B
 
A 

.71
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.3
E


D


C B
 
A 

.81
E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.4
E


D

Chunk 2573:
D


C B
 
A 

.91
E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.5
E


D


C B
 
A 

.02
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.6
E


D


C B
 
A 

.12
E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.7
E


D


C B
 
A 

.22
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.8
E


D

Chunk 2574:
D


C B
 
A 

.32
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.9
E


D


C B
 
A 

.42
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.01
E


D


C B
 
A 

.52
F 

E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.11
E


D


C B
 
A 

.62
E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.21
F

 E

Chunk 2575:
E


D


C B
 
A 

.72
E 

D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.31
F 

E

Chunk 2576:
D 
 C
 
B
 
A
 
.41
maxE
detelpmoC
I
etaD
erutangiS
Continued on pg CE4
CE4 MMWR December 19, 2003

Chunk 2577:
22.The teaching strategies used in this report text, figures, boxes, and 25.The content of this activity was appropriate for my educational needs.
tables were useful. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.

Chunk 2578:
A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree.
C. Neither agree nor disagree.

Chunk 2579:
26.The availability of continuing education credit influenced my
23.Overall, the presentation of the report enhanced my ability to decision to read this report.

Chunk 2580:
understand the material. A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree.
A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree.
B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Neither agree nor disagree.

Chunk 2581:
C. Neither agree nor disagree.
27.How did you learn about this continuing education activity?
24.These recommendations will affect my practice. A. Internet.

Chunk 2582:
A. Strongly agree. D. Disagree. B. Advertisement e.g., fact sheet, MMWR cover, newsletter, or journal.
B. Agree. E. Strongly disagree. C. Coworkersupervisor.

Chunk 2583:
C. Neither agree nor disagree. D. Conference presentation.
E. MMWR subscription.
F. Other.
o rig i nal adj
cid127 cid127 cid127
 
e r i j e n e l 1 being the first instance or

Chunk 2584:
source from which a copy, reproduction,
or translation can be made
see also MMWR.

Chunk 2585:
YOo g r q hi k a Nu i , b oC i n e It e , M b ol i ee Pl t r s i n y A p e i n a si n , n C ne os l o r w a af e k n o n e i i e n , b a s t s i l p e t c s ty , a y , d a o3 s Ih o t, n Ih l mo o n

Chunk 2586:
o t, n Ih l mo o n i a v r n t J a d o a aW t c n t ha 8u a n a d n v n c e a n n T d 8 e L , l , e o u i d d a y dN s e ia e o M D i. F cid0 a y b r d v P n x s 2 r u , V i e 2 il e t i i a A en e a

Chunk 2587:
e t i i a A en e a i n o 9t d i S p a h i D e 6 cid1 s s n s n d , i s T r r i n m . o e t e e o s 3 i n s n n5 M i r u . h n i r a e u cid2 n d a 6 i s r i f e 2 oo s D n D , r x o c c o t s e o m e

Chunk 2588:
o c c o t s e o m e a , y 8s a i n h n a i t e a a p t cid3 c r n U , s d l pu s i s 1 h n s e o v D s g t o s o sD l g w e o , pr G i, e cid1 e t d a a o a n n n r f n o0 i f . r W u i s d r be c n

Chunk 2589:
W u i s d r be c n n t t t 2 a g e, i n n7 C t t F e h h i cid4 r h r r a o k c i d g 0 h i o 7 e h t d e N 6 i a i n et N e u t m o r o w n e v 0 e r e c Ta 1 2 cid5 r a r a f e fs g a tl o e e g 2

Chunk 2590:
fs g a tl o e e g 2 e o de oV r d v 0 u t 9e e d a cid0 h la j d r i n p r cid6 o , o r u , d f n e t ea , u a e 0 m n t 8 cid7 i t e c t t o m M r a h cid1 s T , r t p e ab h 2 ir d s S C h y e i d

Chunk 2591:
d s S C h y e i d r n r b a b W r e cid8 ,e o i s c I , t s t e t W i cid2 e r it t , D 1 d f x eo i l ha M r ep c o W 4 s r p h d p a e o a l c cid4 a e t 2 i sN s e d l k i e cid3 t a o 2 . c ro c

Chunk 2592:
t a o 2 . c ro c a s s e e o u f i n s e n p a i t e o , n s t N t s s k d , 5 f r s r cid6 hs i V m m l o cid4 e i s eo i n t ir w l t s cid9 4 t a o d o o t i a l a o r e i i o V r t p n n w k i W

Chunk 2593:
V r t p n n w k i W s s 2 b e ts ts n n s v e W cid5 t i d o vm f f u a e , s cid5 d np d e i cid10 I ip e l l s s i e s cid5 i n , s h a a m o s y l 1 t f N i i cid5 f C cid6 p e K o V b s l a L nr

Chunk 2594:
K o V b s l a L nr a h e g ow e S c cid5 1 h r i p o s A r m n e cid5 c D o V e cid1 d no ok n r o i 2 cid5 up F e t i m e r t s n s o a n l cid7 u cs u , o e r i g a n a e me C i a cid11 8 v f o o t

Chunk 2595:
a cid11 8 v f o o t p e t s h i gd N r t 2 i i b s r g f u s e 3 a n cid3 2 h s i n n A r o , i u u a r 8 i a e z t r t o i c e cid5 4 e N a o 7 i n s v a fr m e u m h l e cid1 a p kD r w h d n i a r

Chunk 2596:
kD r w h d n i a r e w m n e s , p n s a g t cid1 r yo o o b a a r a c a i t T , Wo d i n cid8 o o u a a , v J s 1 v a r m , a t n l l N k u cid6 e e sg f i r s te h eF t cid9 e o G s 1 n L cid0 e o

Chunk 2597:
G s 1 n L cid0 e o e t t x r e e o e g Je c e e l 5 en s s 8 n da o u d s b cid7 mo d e 7 s h t 1 r a w t e d 5 ,8 s a 3 e cid8 4 s o u , l e r , s a y V 2 N f yo N , o d 7 A i cid10 ee a 0 r h , r i

Chunk 2598:
ee a 0 r h , r i t a 2 i d y m . f s n cid2 T ns o s l n a cid3 e 3 i a r i e 0 l e is M a l , a W , m b ea W n v D 1 r w e w o t a f 0 , r cid4 M d cid3 4 nn 1r a e o r e 5 s u v 2 i o u d 4 s Nt q

Chunk 2599:
2 i o u d 4 s Nt q J 2 a Y N p N t A cid5 i cid4 o 9 b . i e u m h r , cid5 7r u s o s o cid5 s u u i V 6 n i V E , s r r cid6 i r cid8 r n r i L l s g a t 9 d L k a e d cid5 t T s a 6 6 A o cid5 g n

Chunk 2600:
a 6 6 A o cid5 g n e u n s a b 9 e 6 b s o cid12 o cid5 1 8 0 i W d s g a cid11 s d 8 p p o u a 0 c 8 s 6 t td cid6 u e i n 6 op or i f h cid11 cid3 8 I t N 7 s a 6 r d N d c o i l i e i i c 4 o , t

Chunk 2601:
l i e i i c 4 o , t l I P 8 i cid12 V l s i v cid2 N r o o O a m a r s n b i 3 os H a r t . t i S cid11 i y u t a i C t w e y cid13 i a c u C t o I s r m t d2 e a D y s cid8 u b O i s m y t A e h 3 t

Chunk 2602:
i s m y t A e h 3 t cid6 O , s n n a r r E e a cid14 i ri s cid3 e a v l d l l Dt t lu , d l a a a o a e n e o y o t cid4 o T h i k s n b f M f l R a R g , o l n dr o A a cid1 a e an s e oo n f n u J

Chunk 2603:
an s e oo n f n u J , U a bd a d d , T d cid15 g c 2d i a k u e F e F u e n 0 L l cid1 s lo o a s n r eo 0 M f t s l r i ar k cid2 2e S 7 t i u d d m a R e , cid3 C a o a e l 2 U i P m a , d F am 0 o

Chunk 2604:
P m a , d F am 0 o cid10 n r r J I l o A 0 i cid8 G i u i e s f n y t 2 t mo o S n d eU A e . cid2 r n R a e i d n o l R e t n ei 1 l m i n c a ns a 2 i SE ea l ag nl g 0 t S W t i , t a1 h C 0e N A

Chunk 2605:
i , t a1 h C 0e N A u t 2 e A t. Vm r2 o e C0 o A s y aa m us s nc s 0a t t r, y o Wiv , m 2 e l g i p i 2 Nt c y W f a V i e e o 0 J o a s u ni r 0 r nl J u t c yf n e 2 e r a e s i c e a i d t v l

Chunk 2606:
s i c e a i d t v l a io t p l i A y n l , e a y o w a 1 u n 7 n D r i d 3 9 k a t t g a i h i , 9 s n n I u 1 i t m l n 9 g r T 2 a i s y f a b l e W W 2 t 0 m u c A N 0 t t e V 9 a e R 0 i 0 o s a

Chunk 2607:
9 a e R 0 i 0 o s a u d r , c 0 n i t 2 t n i e v g s 2 N it d y i 0 p u le 0 s o v 2 t ir r u 7 t s V , o W 2 C l D N o . ils 0 u t V mr 5 icb 0 ti 1 ao a f 2 c t , i N vit o y . 31

Chunk 2608:
know what matters.
Weekly
MMWR
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report MMWR Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDC and is available free of charge

Chunk 2609:
in electronic format and on a paid subscription basis for paper copy. To receive an electronic copy each week, send an email message to listservlistserv.cdc.gov. The

Chunk 2610:
body content should read SUBscribe mmwrtoc. Electronic copy also is available from CDCs WorldWide Web server at httpwww.cdc.govmmwr or from CDCs

Chunk 2611:
file transfer protocol server at ftpftp.cdc.govpubpublicationsmmwr. To subscribe for paper copy, contact Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government

Chunk 2612:
Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402 telephone 2025121800.

Chunk 2613:
Data in the weekly MMWR are provisional, based on weekly reports to CDC by state health departments. The reporting week concludes at close of business on

Chunk 2614:
Friday compiled data on a national basis are officially released to the public on the following Friday. Address inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material

Chunk 2615:
to be considered for publication, to Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop C08, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30333 telephone 8882323228.

Chunk 2616:
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission citation as to source, however, is appreciated.

Chunk 2617:
All MMWR references are available on the Internet at httpwww.cdc.govmmwr. Use the search function to find specific articles.

Chunk 2618:
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Chunk 2619:
References to nonCDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations or

Chunk 2620:
their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses listed in

Chunk 2621:
MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
 U.S. Government Printing Office 2004633140400056 Region IV ISSN 10575987

