Chunk 1:
Most oral health conditions are largely preventable and can be treated in their early stages. Most cases

Chunk 2:
are dental caries tooth decay, periodontal diseases, tooth loss and oral cancers. Other oral conditions

Chunk 3:
of public health importance are orofacial clefts, noma severe gangrenous disease starting in the mouth

Chunk 4:
mostly affecting children and orodental trauma. Prevalence of the main oral diseases continues to

Chunk 5:
increase globally with growing urbanization and changes in living conditions. This is primarily due to

Chunk 6:
inadequate exposure to fluoride in the water supply and oral hygiene products such as toothpaste,

Chunk 7:
availability and affordability of food with high sugar content and poor access to oral health care services

Chunk 8:
in the community. Marketing of food and beverages high in sugar, as well as tobacco and alcohol, have

Chunk 9:
led to a growing consumption of products that contribute to oral health conditions and other NCDs.
Dental caries results when plaque forms on the surface of a tooth and converts the free sugars all

Chunk 10:
sugars added to foods by the manufacturer, cook or consumer, plus sugars naturally present in honey,

Chunk 11:
syrups and fruit juices contained in foods and drinks into acids that destroy the tooth over time. A

Chunk 12:
continued high intake of free sugars, inadequate exposure to fluoride and a lack of removal of plaque

Chunk 13:
by toothbrushing can lead to caries, pain and sometimes tooth loss and infection. Periodontal disease

Chunk 14:
affects the tissues that both surround and support the teeth. The disease is characterized by bleeding
or swollen gums gingivitis, pain and sometimes bad breath. In its more severe form, the gum can

Chunk 15:
come away from the tooth and supporting bone, causing teeth to become loose and sometimes fall out.

Chunk 16:
Severe periodontal diseases are estimated to affect more than 1 billion cases worldwide. The main risk

Chunk 17:
factors for periodontal disease are poor oral hygiene and tobacco use. Losing teeth is generally the end

Chunk 18:
point of a lifelong history of oral disease, mainly advanced dental caries and severe periodontal
disease, but can also be due to trauma and other causes. The estimated global average prevalence of

Chunk 19:
complete tooth loss is almost 7 among people aged 20 years or older. For people aged 60 years or
older, a much higher global prevalence of 23 has been estimated. Losing teeth can be

Chunk 20:
psychologically traumatic, socially damaging and functionally limiting. Oral cancer includes cancers of
the lip, other parts of the mouth and the oropharynx and combined rank as the 13thmost common

Chunk 21:
cancer worldwide. The global incidence of cancers of the lip and oral cavity is estimated to be 389 846
new cases and 188 438 deaths in 20221.Oral cancer is more common in men and in older people,

Chunk 22:
more deadly in men compared to women and it varies strongly by socioeconomic circumstances.
Tobacco, alcohol and areca nut betel quid use are among the leading causes of oral cancer. In North

Chunk 23:
America and Europe, human papillomavirus infections are responsible for a growing percentage of oral

Chunk 24:
cancers among young people. Orodental trauma results from injury to the teeth, mouth and oral cavity.

Chunk 25:
Latest estimates show that 1 billion people are affected, with a prevalence of around 20 for children

Chunk 26:
up to 12 years old. Orodental trauma can be caused by oral factors such as lack of alignment of teeth
and environmental factors such as unsafe playgrounds, risktaking behaviour, road accidents and

Chunk 27:
violence. Treatment is costly and lengthy and sometimes can even lead to tooth loss, resulting in
complications for facial and psychological development and quality of life. Noma is a severe

Chunk 28:
gangrenous disease of the mouth and the face. It mostly affects children aged 26 years suffering from

Chunk 29:
malnutrition, affected by infectious disease, living in extreme poverty with poor oral hygiene or with
weakened immune systems. Noma is mostly found in subSaharan Africa, although cases have also

Chunk 30:
been reported in Latin America and Asia. Noma starts as a soft tissue lesion a sore of the gums. It

Chunk 31:
then develops into an acute necrotizing gingivitis that progresses rapidly, destroying the soft tissues

Chunk 32:
and further progressing to involve the hard tissues and skin of the face. According to latest estimates

Chunk 33:
from 1998 there are 140 000 new cases of noma annually. Without treatment, noma is fatal in 90 of
cases. Survivors suffer from severe facial disfigurement, have difficulty speaking and eating, endure

Chunk 34:
social stigma, and require complex surgery and rehabilitation. Where noma is detected at an early

Chunk 35:
stage, its progression can be rapidly halted through basic hygiene, antibiotics and improved nutrition.

Chunk 36:
Orofacial clefts, the most common of craniofacial birth defects, have a global prevalence of between 1

Chunk 37:
in 10001500 births, with wide variation in different studies and populations2. Genetic predisposition

Chunk 38:
is a major cause. However, poor maternal nutrition, tobacco consumption, alcohol and obesity during

Chunk 39:
pregnancy also play a role. In lowincome settings, there is a high mortality rate in the neonatal period.

Chunk 40:
If lip and palate clefts are properly treated by surgery, complete rehabilitation is possible. Most oral

Chunk 41:
diseases and conditions share modifiable risk factors such as tobacco use, alcohol consumption and

Chunk 42:
an unhealthy diet high in free sugars that are common to other NCDs including cardiovascular disease,

Chunk 43:
cancer, chronic respiratory disease and diabetes. In addition, diabetes has been linked in a reciprocal

Chunk 44:
way with the development and progression of periodontal disease. There is also a causal link between
the high consumption of sugar and diabetes, obesity and dental caries. Oral diseases

Chunk 45:
disproportionately affect the poor and socially disadvantaged members of society. There is a very
strong and consistent association between socioeconomic status income, occupation and educational

Chunk 46:
level and the prevalence and severity of oral diseases. This association exists from early childhood to
older age and across populations in high, middle and lowincome countries. The burden of oral

Chunk 47:
diseases and other noncommunicable diseases can be reduced through public health interventions by
addressing common risk factors. These include Adequate exposure to fluoride is an essential factor in

Chunk 48:
the prevention of dental caries. Twicedaily tooth brushing with fluoridecontaining toothpaste 1000 to
1500 ppm should be encouraged. Unequal distribution of oral health professionals and a lack of

Chunk 49:
appropriate health facilities to meet population needs in most countries means that access to primary

Chunk 50:
oral health services is often low. Outofpocket costs for oral health care can be major barriers to
accessing care. Paying for necessary oral health care is among the leading reasons for catastrophic

Chunk 51:
health expenditures, resulting in an increased risk of impoverishment and economic hardship. The
World Health Assembly approved aResolution on oral healthin 2021 at the Seventyfourth World Health

Chunk 52:
Assembly. The Resolution recommends a shift from the traditional curative approach towards a
preventive approach that includes promotion of oral health within the family, schools and workplaces,

Chunk 53:
and includes timely, comprehensive and inclusive care within the primary healthcare system. The
Resolution affirms that oral health should be firmly embedded within the NCD agenda and that oral

Chunk 54:
healthcare interventions should be included in national universal health coverage benefit packages. In

Chunk 55:
response to the mandate outlined in the resolution, the Secretariat developed theGlobal strategy on
oral health, adopted in May 2022 decision WHA75.11, and included theGlobal oral health action plan

Chunk 56:
2023n2030 GOHAPin the report on NCDs, noted by the Seventysixth World Health Assembly in
2023 WHA76.9. The GOHAP includes a range of actions for Member States, the WHO Secretariat,

Chunk 57:
international partners, civil society organizations and the private sector. In 2024, as an outcome of the
first ever WHO Global Oral Health Meeting that took place 2629 November in Bangkok, Thailand,

Chunk 58:
theBangkok Declaration No Health Without Oral Healthwas adopted. This Declaration advocates for
elevating oral diseases as a global public health priority. The Bangkok Declaration reiterates Member

Chunk 59:
States commitment to the landmark 2021 resolution on oral health, which advances the prevention and
control of oral diseases as part of the NCD, UHC and environmental agendas. It emphasizes the need

Chunk 60:
to strengthen health systems through primary health care approaches, ensuring that environmental
sustainability and climate resilience are central components. References 1. Ferlay J, Ervik M, Lam F,

Chunk 61:
Laversanne M, Colombet M, Mery L, Piñeros M, Znaor A, Soerjomataram I, Bray F 2024. Global
Cancer Observatory Cancer Today. Lyon, France International Agency for Research on Cancer.

Chunk 62:
Available from httpsgco.iarc.who.inttoday 2. Salari N, Darvishi N, Heydari M, Bokaee S, Darvishi F,
Mohammadi M. Global prevalence of cleft palate, cleft lip and cleft palate and lip A comprehensive

Chunk 63:
systematic review and metaanalysis. J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2021S246878552100118X.
doi10.1016j.jormas.2021.05.008. Related News Fact sheets

